 A MAIORE AD MINUS ,,,,, from the greater to the smaller ,,,,, From general to particular; "What holds for all X also holds for one particular X." – _argumentum a fortiori_


 A MINORE AD MAIUS ,,,,, from the smaller to the greater ,,,,, an inference from smaller to bigger; what is forbidden at least is forbidden at more ("If riding a bicycle two on it is forbidden, riding it three on it is at least similarly punished".)


 A SOLIS ORTU USQUE AD OCCASUM ,,,,, from sunrise to sunset ,,,,, 


 AB ABSURDO ,,,,, from the absurd ,,,,, Said of an argument either for a conclusion that rests on the alleged absurdity of an opponent's argument (cf. appeal to ridicule) or that another assertion is false because it is absurd. The phrase is distinct from _reductio ad absurdum_, which is usually a valid logical argument.


 AB ABUSU AD USUM NON VALET CONSEQUENTIA ,,,,, an inference from an abuse to a use is not valid ,,,,, Rights abused are still rights; confer _abusus non tollit usum_.


 AB AETERNO ,,,,, from the eternal ,,,,, Literally, "from the everlasting", "from eternity", and "from outside of time". Philosophically and theologically, it indicates something, e. g., the universe, that was created from outside of time. Sometimes the phrase is used incorrectly to denote "from time immemorial", "since the beginning of time", or "from an infinitely remote time in the past", i. e., not from without time but from a point within time.


 AB ANTIQUO ,,,,, from the ancient ,,,,, From ancient times


 A BENE PLACITO ,,,,, from one well pleased ,,,,, Or, "at will" or "at one's pleasure". This phrase, and its Italian (_beneplacito_) and Spanish (_beneplácito_) derivatives, are synonymous with the more common _ad libitum_ (at pleasure).


 AB EPISTULIS ,,,,, from the letters^([1]) ,,,,, Regarding or pertaining to correspondence;^([1]) secretarial office in the Roman Empire


 AB EXTRA ,,,,, from beyond/without ,,,,, Legal term denoting derivation from an external source, rather than from a person's self or mind, this latter source being denoted by "ab intra".


 AB HINC ,,,,, from here on ,,,,, Also sometimes written as "abhinc"


 AB IMO PECTORE ,,,,, from the deepest chest ,,,,, Or "from the bottom of my heart", "with deepest affection", or "sincerely". Attributed to Julius Caesar.


 AB INCONVENIENTI ,,,,, from an inconvenient thing ,,,,, New Latin for "based on unsuitability", "from inconvenience", or "from hardship". An _argumentum ab inconvenienti_ is one based on the difficulties involved in pursuing a line of reasoning, and is thus a form of appeal to consequences. The phrase refers to the legal principle that an argument from inconvenience has great weight.


 AB INCUNABULIS ,,,,, from the cradle ,,,,, Thus, "from the beginning" or "from infancy". _Incunabula_ is commonly used in English to refer to the earliest stage or origin of something, and especially to copies of books that predate the spread of the printing press circa AD 1500.


 AB INITIO ,,,,, from the beginning ,,,,, Or, "from the outset", referring to an inquiry or investigation. In literature, it refers to a story told from the beginning rather than "_in medias res_" ("from the middle"). In law, it refers to a thing being true from its beginning or from the instant of the act, rather than from when the court declared it so. An annulment is a judicial declaration of the invalidity or nullity of a marriage _ab initio_; i. e., that the pseudo marriage was "no thing" (in Latin, "nullius", from which the word "nullity" derives) and never existed, except perhaps in name only. In science, the phrase refers to the first principles. In other contexts, it often refers to beginner or training courses. "_Ab initio mundi_" means "from the beginning of the world".


 AB INTESTATO ,,,,, from an intestate ,,,,, From a decedent, i. e., a dead person, who died without executing a legal will; cf. _ex testamento_


 AB INTRA ,,,,, from within ,,,,, From the inside; the opposite of _ab extra_


 AB INVITO ,,,,, unwillingly ,,,,, 


 AB IRATO ,,,,, from an angry man ,,,,, Or, "by an angry person"; used in law to describe a decision or action that is detrimental to those whom it affects and is motivated by hatred or anger instead of reason. The form _irato_ is masculine; however, this does not limit the application of the phrase to men: rather, "person" is meant because the phrase probably elides "homo" ("man/person"), not "vir" ("men").


 AB ORIGINE ,,,,, from the source ,,,,, From the origin, beginning, source, or commencement; i. e., "originally". It is the source of the word _aboriginal_.


 AB OVO USQUE AD MALA ,,,,, from the egg to the apples ,,,,, From Horace, _Satire_, 1.3. Means "from beginning to end", based on the Roman main meal typically beginning with an egg dish and ending with fruit; cf. the English phrase _soup to nuts_. Thus, _ab ovo_ means "from the beginning", and can connote thoroughness.


 ABSENS HAERES NON ERIT ,,,,, an absent person will not be an heir ,,,,, Legal principle that a person who is not present is unlikely to inherit


 ABSENTE REO (ABS. RE.) ,,,,, [with] the defendant being absent ,,,,, Legal phrase denoting action "in the absence of the accused"


 ABSIT INIURIA ,,,,, "let injury be absent" ,,,,, Expresses the wish that no insult or injury be presumed or done by the speaker's words, i. e., "no offense". Also rendered _absit iniuria verbis_ ("let injury be absent from these words"). Contrast with _absit invidia_.


 ABSIT INVIDIA ,,,,, "let ill will/envy be absent" ,,,,, Said in the context of a statement of excellence: unlike the English expression "no offense", _absit invidia_ is intended to ward off envious deities who might interpret a statement of excellence as hubris. Also extended to _absit invidia verbo_, ("may ill will/envy be absent from these words"). Contrast it with _absit iniuria verbis_. An explanation of Livy's usage.


 ABSIT OMEN ,,,,, let an omen be absent ,,,,, Or, "let this not be a bad omen". Expresses the wish that something seemingly ill-boding does not turn out to be an omen for future events, and calls on Divine protection against evil.


 ABSOLUTUM DOMINIUM ,,,,, absolute dominion ,,,,, Total, if not supreme, power, dominion, ownership, and sovereignty


 ABSOLVO ,,,,, I acquit ,,,,, Legal term pronounced by a judge to acquit a defendant following his trial. _Te absolvo_ or _absolvo te_, translated, "I forgive you," said by Roman Catholic priests during the Sacrament of Confession, in Latin prior to the Second Vatican Council and in vernacular thereafter.


 ABUNDANS CAUTELA NON NOCET ,,,,, abundant caution does no harm ,,,,, Frequently re-phrased as "one can never be too careful"


 AB UNO DISCE OMNES ,,,,, from one, learn all ,,,,, From Virgil, _Aeneid_, Book 2, 65-6. Refers to situations where a single example or observation indicates a general or universal truth. Visible in the court of the character King Silas in the American television series _Kings_.


 AB URBE CONDITA (A.U.C.) ,,,,, from the city having been founded ,,,,, Or, "from the founding of Rome", which occurred in 753 BC, according to Livy's count. It was used as a referential year in ancient Rome from which subsequent years were calculated, prior to being replaced by other dating conventions. Also _anno urbis conditae_ (a.u.c.); literally "in the year of the founded city".


 ABUSUS NON TOLLIT USUM ,,,,, misuse does not remove use ,,,,, The misuse of some thing does not eliminate the possibility of its correct use.


 AB UTILI ,,,,, from utility ,,,,, Used of an argument


 ABYSSUS ABYSSUM INVOCAT ,,,,, deep calleth unto deep ,,,,, From Psalms 42:7; some translations have "sea calls to sea".


 A CAELO USQUE AD CENTRUM ,,,,, from the sky to the center ,,,,, Or, "from Heaven all the way to the center of the Earth". In law, it may refer to the proprietary principle of _Cuius est solum, eius est usque ad coelum et ad inferos_ ("Whosesoever is the soil, it is his up to the sky and down to the depths [of the Earth]").


 A CAPITE AD CALCEM ,,,,, from head to heel ,,,,, From top to bottom; all the way through; or from head to toe; see also _a pedibus usque ad caput_


 ACCIPE HOC ,,,,, take this ,,,,, Motto of the 848 Naval Air Squadron, British Royal Navy


 ACCUSARE NEMO SE DEBET NISI CORAM DEO ,,,,, no one ought to accuse himself except in the presence of God ,,,,, Legal principle denoting that an accused person is entitled to plead not guilty, and that a witness is not obligated to respond or submit a document that would incriminate himself. A similar phrase is _nemo tenetur se ipsum accusare_ ("no one is bound to accuse himself"). See right to silence.


 A CONTRARIO ,,,,, from the opposite ,,,,, Equivalent to "on the contrary" and "_au contraire_". An _argumentum a contrario_ ("argument from the contrary") is an argument or proof by contrast or direct opposite.


 ACTA DEOS NUMQUAM MORTALIA FALLUNT ,,,,, mortal actions never deceive the gods ,,,,, Ovid, _Tristia_, 1.2.97: _si tamen acta deos numquam mortalia fallunt, / a culpa facinus scitis abesse mea._ ("Yet if mortal actions never deceive the gods, / you know that crime was absent from my fault.")


 ACTA EST FABULA PLAUDITE ,,,,, The play has been performed; applaud! ,,,,, Common ending to ancient Roman comedies; Suetonius claimed in _The Twelve Caesars_ that these were the last words of Augustus; Sibelius applied them to the third movement of his String Quartet No. 2, so that his audience would recognize that it was the last one, because a fourth would be ordinarily expected.


 ACTA NON VERBA ,,,,, Deeds Not Words ,,,,, Motto of the United States Merchant Marine Academy


 ACTA SANCTORUM ,,,,, Deeds of the Saints ,,,,, Also used in the singular preceding a saint's name: _Acta Sancti_ ("Deeds of Saint") N.; a common title of hagiography works


 ACTIONES SECUNDUM FIDEI ,,,,, action follows belief ,,,,, "We act according to what we believe (ourselves to be)."^([2])


 ACTUS ME INVITO FACTUS NON EST MEUS ACTUS ,,,,, the act done by me against my will is not my act ,,,,, 


 ACTUS NON FACIT REUM NISI MENS SIT REA ,,,,, The act does not make [a person] guilty unless the mind should be guilty. ,,,,, Legal principle of the presumption of _mens rea_ in a crime


 ACTUS REUS ,,,,, guilty act ,,,,, The actual crime that is committed, as distinguished from the intent, thinking, and rationalizing that procured the criminal act; the external elements of a crime, as contrasted with the _mens rea_, i. e., the internal elements.


 AD ABSURDUM ,,,,, to absurdity ,,,,, In logic, to the point of being silly or nonsensical. See also _reductio ad absurdum_. Not to be confused with _ab absurdo_ ("from the absurd").


 AD ABUNDANTIAM ,,,,, to abundance ,,,,, In legal language, used when providing additional evidence to an already sufficient collection. Also used commonly, as an equivalent of "as if this wasn't enough".


 AD ACTA ,,,,, to the archives ,,,,, Denoting the irrelevance of a thing


 AD ALTIORA TENDO ,,,,, I strive towards higher things ,,,,, 


 AD ARBITRIUM ,,,,, at will, at pleasure ,,,,, 


 AD ASTRA ,,,,, to the stars ,,,,, Name or motto, in whole or part, of many organizations, publications


 AD ASTRA PER ASPERA ,,,,, to the stars through difficulties ,,,,, Or, "a rough road leads to the stars", as on the Launch Complex 34 memorial plaque for the astronauts of Apollo 1; motto of the State of Kansas and other organisations


 AD AUGUSTA PER ANGUSTA ,,,,, to rise to a high position overcoming hardships ,,,,, 


 AD CAPTANDUM VULGUS ,,,,, in order to capture the crowd ,,,,, To appeal to the masses. Often said of or used by politicians. An _argumentum ad captandum_ is an argument designed to please the crowd.


 AD CLERUM ,,,,, to the clergy ,,,,, Formal letter or communication in the Christian tradition from a bishop to his clergy. An "ad clerum" may be an encouragement in a time of celebration or a technical explanation of new regulations or canons.


 A DEUCALIONE ,,,,, from _or_ since Deucalion ,,,,, A long time ago; from Gaius Lucilius, _Satires_, 6, 284


 AD EUNDEM ,,,,, to the same ,,,,, An _ad eundem_ degree, from the Latin _ad eundem gradum_ ("to the same step" or "to the same degree"), is a courtesy degree awarded by a university or college to an alumnus of another. It is not an honorary degree but a recognition of the formal learning for which the degree was earned at another college.


 AD FONTES ,,,,, to the sources ,,,,, Motto of Renaissance humanism and the Protestant Reformation


 AD FUNDUM ,,,,, to the bottom ,,,,, Said during a generic toast; equivalent to "bottoms up!" In other contexts, it generally means "back to the basics".


 AD HOC ,,,,, to this ,,,,, Generally means "for this", in the sense of improvised or intended only for a specific, immediate purpose.


 AD HOMINEM ,,,,, to the man ,,,,, Or, "at the man". Typically used in _argumentum ad hominem_, a logical fallacy consisting of criticizing a person when the subject of debate is the person's ideas or argument, on the mistaken assumption that the soundness of an argument is dependent on the qualities of the proponent.


 AD HONOREM ,,,,, to the honour ,,,,, "for the honour", not for the purpose of gaining any material reward


 AD INFINITUM ,,,,, to infinity ,,,,, Enduring forever. Used to designate a property which repeats in all cases in mathematical proof. Also used in philosophical contexts to mean "repeating in all cases".


 AD INTERIM (AD INT) ,,,,, for the meantime ,,,,, As in the term "_chargé d'affaires ad interim_", denoting a diplomatic officer who acts in place of an ambassador


 AD KALENDAS GRAECAS ,,,,, at the Greek Calends ,,,,, Attributed by Suetonius in _The Twelve Caesars_ to Augustus. The Calends were specific days of the Roman calendar, not of the Greek, and so the "Greek Kalends" would never occur. Similar to "when pigs fly".


 AD LIBITUM (AD LIB) ,,,,, toward pleasure ,,,,, Loosely, "according to what pleases" or "as you wish"; _libitum_ comes from the past participle of _libere_, "to please". It typically indicates in music and theatrical scripts that the performer has the liberty to change or omit something. _Ad lib_ is specifically often used when someone improvises or ignores limitations. Also used by some restaurants in favor of the colloquial "all you can eat or drink".


 AD LITEM ,,,,, to the lawsuit ,,,,, Legal phrase referring to a party appointed by a court to act in a lawsuit on behalf of another party who is deemed incapable of representing himself. An individual who acts in this capacity is called a _guardian ad litem_.


 AD LUCEM ,,,,, to the light ,,,,, Motto of Oxford High School (Oxford), the University of Lisbon, Withington Girls' School, Little Flower Academy and St. Bartholomew's School, Newbury, UK


 AD MAIOREM DEI GLORIAM _OR_ AD MAJOREM DEI GLORIAM (AMDG) ,,,,, to the greater glory of God ,,,,, Motto of the Society of Jesus (Jesuits). Edward Elgar dedicated his oratorio _The Dream of Gerontius_ "A.M.D.G."


 AD MELIORA ,,,,, towards better things ,,,,, Motto of St. Patrick's College, Cavan, Ireland


 AD MORTEM ,,,,, to death ,,,,, Medical phrase serving as a synonym for death


 AD MULTOS ANNOS ,,,,, to many years ,,,,, Wish for a long life; similar to "many happy returns"


 AD NAUSEAM ,,,,, to seasickness ,,,,, Or, "to the point of disgust". Sometimes used as a humorous alternative to _ad infinitum_. An _argumentum ad nauseam_ is a logical fallacy whose erroneous proof is proffered by prolonged repetition of the argument, i. e., the argument is repeated so many times that persons are "sick of it".


 AD OCULOS ,,,,, to the eyes ,,,,, "obvious on sight" or "obvious to anyone that sees it"


 AD PEDEM LITTERAE ,,,,, to the foot of the letter ,,,,, Thus, "exactly as it is written"; similar to the phrase "to the letter", meaning "to the last detail"


 AD PERPETUAM MEMORIAM ,,,,, to the perpetual memory ,,,,, Generally precedes "of" and a person's name, and is used to wish for someone to be remembered long after death


 AD PONDUS OMNIUM (AD POND OM) ,,,,, to the weight of all things ,,,,, More loosely, "considering everything's weight". The abbreviation was historically used by physicians and others to signify that the last prescribed ingredient is to weigh as much as all of the previously mentioned ones.


 AD QUOD DAMNUM ,,,,, to whatever damage ,,,,, Meaning "according to the harm" or "in proportion to the harm". The phrase is used in tort law as a measure of damages inflicted, implying that a remedy, if one exists, ought to correspond specifically and only to the damage suffered (cf. _damnum absque iniuria_).


 AD REFERENDUM ,,,,, to be proposed [before the Senate] ,,,,, Loosely "subject to reference": provisionally approved, but still needing official approval. Not the same as a referendum.


 (AD REF) ,,,,, ,,,,, 


 AD REM ,,,,, to the matter ,,,,, "to the point", without digression


 AD SUMUS ,,,,, here we are ,,,,, Motto of the Brazilian Marine Corps


 AD SUSCEPTUM PERFICIENDUM ,,,,, in order to achieve what has been undertaken ,,,,, Motto of the Association of Trust Schools


 AD TERMINUM QUI PRAETERIIT ,,,,, for the term which has passed ,,,,, Legal phrase for a writ of entry _ad terminum qui praeteriit_ ("for the term which has passed").^([3])


 AD UNDAS ,,,,, to the waves ,,,,, Equivalent to "to Hell"


 AD UNUM ,,,,, to one ,,,,, 


 AD USUM DELPHINI ,,,,, for the use of the Dauphin ,,,,, Said of a work that has been expurgated of offensive or improper parts. The phrase originates from editions of Greek and Roman classics which King Louis XIV of France had censored for his heir apparent, the _Dauphin_. Also rarely "in usum Delphini" ("into the use of the _Dauphin_").


 AD USUM PROPRIUM (AD US. PROPR.) ,,,,, for one's own use ,,,,, 


 AD UTRUMQUE PARATUS ,,,,, prepared for either [alternative] ,,,,, Motto of Lund University, with the implied alternatives being the book (study) and the sword (defending the nation in war) and of the United States Marine Corps' III Marine Expeditionary Force


 AD VALOREM ,,,,, according to value ,,,,, Used in commerce to refer to ad valorem taxes, i. e., taxes based on the assessed value of real estate or personal property


 AD VICTORIAM ,,,,, to victory ,,,,, More commonly translated "for victory", it was a battlecry of the Romans


 AD VITAM AETERNAM ,,,,, to eternal life ,,,,, Also "to life everlasting"; a common Biblical phrase


 AD VITAM AUT CULPAM ,,,,, for life or until fault ,,,,, Phrase describing the term of a political office as ending upon the death of the officer or his commission of a sufficiently grave immorality and/or legal crime.


 ADDENDUM ,,,,, thing to be added ,,,,, An item to be added, especially as a supplement to a book. The plural is _addenda_.


 ADAEQUATIO INTELLECTUS ET REI ,,,,, correspondence of the mind and reality ,,,,, One of the classic definitions of "truth". When the mind has the same form as reality, we _think truth_. Also found as _adaequatio rei et intellectus_.


 ADAEQUATIO INTELLECTUS NOSTRI CUM RE ,,,,, conformity of our minds to the fact ,,,,, Phrase used in epistemology regarding the nature of understanding.


 ADSUM ,,,,, I am here ,,,,, Equivalent to "Present!" or "Here!" The opposite of _absum_ ("I am absent").


 ADVERSUS SOLEM NE LOQUITOR ,,,,, do not speak against the Sun ,,,,, Or, "do not argue what is obviously/manifestly incorrect".


 ADVOCATUS DIABOLI ,,,,, Devil's advocate ,,,,, Someone who, in the face of a specific argument, voices an argument that he does not necessarily accept, for the sake of argument and discovering the truth by testing the opponent's argument. Confer the term "arguendo".


 AEGRI SOMNIA ,,,,, a sick man's dreams ,,,,, Horace, _Ars Poetica_, 7. Loosely, "troubled dreams".


 AETATIS ,,,,, of age / aged ,,,,, Often abbreviated to "aetat.", or more frequently further to "aet."; meaning "of age _ [years]" or "aged _ [years]". E. g., "aetatis 36" denotes being "36 years old".


 AETATIS SUAE ,,,,, of his age (followed by an ordinal number) ,,,,, Thus, "at the age of _ [years]". Appears on portraits, gravestones, monuments, et cetera. Usually preceded by _anno_ (AAS), "in the year [of his age/life] _". Sometimes shortened to _aetatis_, _aetat.", or even "aet._ Frequently combined with _Anno Domini_, giving a date as both the theoretical age of Jesus Christ and the age of the decedent; e. g., _Obiit anno Domini MDCXXXVI^(o) (tricensimo sexto), [anno] aetatis suae XXV^(o) (vicensimo quinto)_ ("he died in the 1636th year of the Lord, [being] the 25th [year] of his age[/life]").


 A FALSIS PRINCIPIIS PROFICISCI ,,,,, to set forth from false principles ,,,,, Legal phrase; Cicero, _De Finibus_, 4.53.


 AFFIDAVIT ,,,,, he asserted ,,,,, Legal term from "fides" ("faith"), originating at least from Medieval Latin to denote a statement under oath.


 A FORTIORI ,,,,, from the stronger ,,,,, Loosely, "even more so" or "with even stronger reason". Often used to lead from a less certain proposition to a more evident corollary.


 AGE QUOD AGIS ,,,,, do what you are doing ,,,,, More often translated as "do well whatever you do". Literally translated, it means "do what you do"; figuratively it means "keep going, because you are inspired or dedicated to do so". This is the motto of several Roman Catholic schools. It was also used by Pope St. John XXIII in the sense of "do not be concerned with any other matter than the task in hand"; he was allaying worry of what would become of him in the future: his sense of "age quod agis" was "joy" regarding what is presently occurring and "detachment" from concern of the future. (Pope St. John XXIII, _Journal of a Soul_, pages 154-5)


 AGERE SEQUITUR (ESSE) ,,,,, action follows being ,,,,, Metaphysical and moral principle that indicates the connection of ontology, obligation, and ethics.^([2])


 AGNUS DEI ,,,,, Lamb of God ,,,,, Latin translation from John 1: 36, when St. John the Baptist exclaimed "Ecce Agnus Dei!" ("Behold the Lamb of God!") upon seeing Jesus Christ; it refers both to the innocence of a lamb and to Christ being a sacrificial lamb after the Jewish religious practice.


 ALEA IACTA EST ,,,,, the die is cast ,,,,, Or, in Greek, ἀνερρίφθω κύβος _anerrhíphthō kýbos_; said by Julius Caesar upon crossing the Rubicon in 49 BC, according to Suetonius. The original meaning was similar to "the game is afoot", but its modern meaning, like that of the phrase "crossing the Rubicon", denotes passing the point of no return on a momentous decision and entering into a risky endeavor where the outcome is left to chance.


 ALENDA LUX UBI ORTA LIBERTAS ,,,,, light [is] to be nourished where liberty [has] arisen. ,,,,, Or. "let learning be cherished". The motto of Davidson College.


 ALIAS ,,,,, at another time, otherwise ,,,,, An assumed name or pseudonym; similar to _alter ego_, but more specifically referring to a name, not to a "second self".


 ALIBI ,,,,, elsewhere ,,,,, Legal defense where a defendant attempts to show that he was elsewhere at the time a crime was committed.


 ,,,,, ,,,,, His alibi is sound; he gave evidence that he was in another city on the night of the murder.


 ALIQUID STAT PRO ALIQUO ,,,,, something stands for something else ,,,,, Foundational definition in semiotics


 ALIS AQUILAE ,,,,, on an eagle's wings ,,,,, Quotation from Isaiah, 40: "But those who wait for the Lord shall find their strength renewed, they shall mount up on wings like eagles, they shall run and not grow weary, they shall walk and not grow faint."


 ALIS GRAVE NIL ,,,,, nothing [is] heavy with wings ,,,,, Or, "nothing is heavy to those who have wings". Motto of the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.


 ALIS VOLAT PROPRIIS ,,,,, she flies with her own wings ,,,,, Motto of the State of Oregon, adopted in 1987; it replaced the previous state motto of "The Union", which was adopted in 1957.


 ALMA MATER ,,,,, nourishing mother ,,,,, Term used for the university one attends or has attended. Another university term, _matriculation_, is also derived from _mater_. The term suggests that the students are "fed" knowledge and taken care of by the university. The term is also used for a university's traditional school anthem.


 ALTER EGO ,,,,, another I ,,,,, Another self, a second persona or alias. Can be used to describe different facets or identities of a single character, or different characters who seem representations of the same personality. Often used of a fictional character's secret identity.


 ALTERIUS NON SIT QUI SUUS ESSE POTEST ,,,,, let no man be another's who can be his own ,,,,, Final sentence from Aesop ascribed fable (see also Aesop's Fables) "The Frogs Who Desired a King" as appears in the collection commonly known as the "Anonymus Neveleti", in Fable 21B: _De ranis a Iove querentibus regem_). Motto of Paracelsus. Usually attributed to Cicero.


 ALTERUM NON LAEDERE ,,,,, to not wound another ,,,,, One of Justinian I's three basic legal precepts


 ALUMNUS _or_ ,,,,, pupil ,,,,, Graduate or former student of a school, college, or university. Plural of alumnus is alumni (male). Plural of alumna is alumnae (female).


 ALUMNA ,,,,, ,,,,, 


 A MARI USQUE AD MARE ,,,,, from sea to sea ,,,,, This translation ignores the word usque, which is an emphasis word, so a better translation is probably from sea even unto sea. From Psalm 72:8, "_Et dominabitur a mari usque ad mare, et a flumine usque ad terminos terrae_" (KJV: "He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth"). National motto of Canada.


 AMICUS CERTUS IN RE INCERTA ,,,,, a sure friend in an unsure matter ,,,,, Ennius, as quoted by Cicero in _Laelius de Amicitia_ s. 64


 AMICUS CURIAE ,,,,, friend of the court ,,,,, An adviser, or a person who can obtain or grant access to the favour of a powerful group, e. g., the a Roman Curia. In current United States legal usage, an _amicus curiae_ is a third party allowed to submit a legal opinion in the form of an _amicus_ brief to the court.


 AMICUS PLATO, SED MAGIS AMICA VERITAS. ,,,,, Plato is my friend, but truth is a better friend. ,,,,, An assertion that truth is more valuable than friendship; attributed to Aristotle, _Nicomachean Ethics_, 1096a15 and Roger Bacon, _Opus Majus_, Part 1, Chapter 5.


 AMITTERE LEGEM TERRAE ,,,,, to lose the law of the land ,,,,, An obsolete legal phrase signifying the forfeiture of the right of swearing in any court or cause, or to become infamous.


 AMAT VICTORIA CURAM ,,,,, victory favors care ,,,,, Motto of Baylor School, Chattanooga, Tennessee; Wellesley College Primary School, Eastbourne, New Zealand; and Victoria College, St. Helier Parish, Jersey, Channel Islands.


 AMOR DEI INTELLECTUALIS ,,,,, intellectual love of God ,,,,, Baruch Spinoza


 AMOR ET MELLE ET FELLE EST FECUNDISSIMUS ,,,,, love is rich with both honey and venom ,,,,, 


 AMOR FATI ,,,,, love of fate ,,,,, Nietzscheian alternative world view to that represented by _memento mori_ ("remember you must die"): Nietzsche believed "amor fati" was more affirmative of life.


 AMOR OMNIBUS IDEM ,,,,, love is the same for all ,,,,, Virgil, _Georgics_, 3


 AMOR PATRIAE ,,,,, love of the fatherland ,,,,, Or, "love of the nation", i. e., patriotism


 AMOR VINCIT OMNIA ,,,,, love conquers all ,,,,, Inscribed on a bracelet worn by the Prioress in Chaucer's _The Canterbury Tales_; originally from Virgil, _Eclogues_, 10, 69: _omnia vincit amor: et nos cedamus amori_ ("love conquers all: let us too surrender to love").


 AN NESCIS, MI FILI, QUANTILLA PRUDENTIA MUNDUS REGATUR? ,,,,, Do you not know, my son, with how little wisdom the world is governed? ,,,,, Said by Axel Oxenstierna to encourage his son, a delegate to the negotiations that would lead to the Peace of Westphalia, who worried about his ability to hold his own amidst experienced and eminent statesmen and diplomats.


 ANGLICE ,,,,, in English ,,,,, Used before the anglicized version of a word or name. For example, "Terra Mariae, _anglice_, Maryland".


 ANIMUS IN CONSULENDO LIBER ,,,,, a mind unfettered in deliberation ,,,,, Motto of NATO


 ANNO (AN.) ,,,,, in the year ,,,,, Also used in such phrases as _anno urbis conditae_ (see _ab urbe condita_), _Anno Domini_, and _anno regni_.


 ANNO DOMINI (A.D.) ,,,,, in the year of the Lord ,,,,, Abbreviated from _Anno Domini Nostri Iesu Christi_ ("in the year of Our Lord Jesus Christ"), the predominantly used system for dating years across the world; used with the Gregorian Calendar and based on the perceived year of the birth of Jesus Christ. The years before His birth were formerly signified by _a. C. n_ (_ante Christum natum_ ("before Christ was born")), but now use the English abbreviation "BC" ("before Christ"). For example, Augustus was born in the year 63 BC and died in AD 14.


 ANNO REGNI ,,,,, In the year of the reign ,,,,, Precedes "of" and the current ruler


 ANNUIT CŒPTIS ,,,,, he nods at things now begun ,,,,, Or, "he approves our undertakings". Motto on the reverse of the Great Seal of the United States and, consequently, on the reverse of the United States one-dollar bill; in this context the motto refers to God.


 ANNUS HORRIBILIS ,,,,, horrible year ,,,,, Recent pun on _annus mirabilis_, first used by Queen Elizabeth II to describe what a bad year 1992 had been for her, and subsequently occasionally used to refer to many other years perceived as "horrible". In Classical Latin, this phrase could actually mean "terrifying year". See also _annus terribilis_.


 ANNUS MIRABILIS ,,,,, wonderful year ,,,,, Used particularly to refer to the years 1665-6, during which Isaac Newton made revolutionary inventions and discoveries in calculus, motion, optics and gravitation. _Annus Mirabilis_ is also the title of a poem by John Dryden written in the same year. It has since been used to refer to other years, especially to 1905, when Albert Einstein made equally revolutionary discoveries concerning the photoelectric effect, Brownian motion, mass-energy equivalence, and the special theory of relativity. _(See Annus Mirabilis papers)_


 ANNUS TERRIBILIS ,,,,, dreadful year ,,,,, Used to describe 1348, the year the Black Death began to afflict Europe


 ANTE BELLUM ,,,,, before the war ,,,,, As in _status quo ante bellum_ ("as it was before the war"); commonly used in the Southern United States as _antebellum_ to refer to the period preceding the American Civil War.


 ANTE CIBUM (A.C.) ,,,,, before food ,,,,, Medical shorthand for "before meals"


 ANTE FACIEM DOMINI ,,,,, before the face of the Lord ,,,,, Motto of the Christian Brothers College, Adelaide


 ANTE LITTERAM ,,,,, before the letter ,,,,, Said of an expression or term that describes something which existed before the phrase itself was introduced or became common. Example: Alan Turing was a computer scientist _ante litteram_, since the field of "computer science" was not yet recognized in Turing's day.


 ANTE MERIDIEM (A.M.) ,,,,, before midday ,,,,, From midnight to noon; confer _post meridiem_


 ANTE MORTEM ,,,,, before death ,,,,, See _post mortem_ ("after death")


 ANTE OMNIA ARMARI ,,,,, before all else, be armed ,,,,, 


 ANTE PRANDIUM (A.P.) ,,,,, before lunch ,,,,, Used on pharmaceutical prescriptions to denote "before a meal". Less common is _post prandium_ ("after lunch").


 ANTIQUI COLANT ANTIQUUM DIERUM ,,,,, let the ancients worship the ancient of days ,,,,, The motto of Chester


 A PEDIBUS USQUE AD CAPUT ,,,,, from feet to head ,,,,, Or, "completely"; similar to the English expressions "from tip to toe" and "from head to toe". Equally _a capite ad calcem_. See also _ab ovo usque ad mala_.


 APERIRE TERRAM GENTIBUS ,,,,, open the land to nations ,,,,, Motto of Ferdinand de Lesseps referring to the Suez and Panama Canals. Also appears on a plaque at Kinshasa train station.


 A POSSE AD ESSE ,,,,, from being able to being ,,,,, "From possibility to actuality" or "from being possible to being actual".


 A POSTERIORI ,,,,, from the latter ,,,,, Based on observation, i. e., empirical evidence; the reverse of _a priori_. Used in mathematics and logic to denote something that is known after a proof has been carried out. In philosophy, used to denote something known from experience.


 APPARATUS CRITICUS ,,,,, tools of a critic ,,,,, Textual notes or a list of other readings relating to a document, especially in a scholarly edition of a text.


 A PRIORI ,,,,, from the former ,,,,, Presupposed independent of experience; the reverse of _a posteriori_. Used in mathematics and logic to denote something that is known or postulated before a proof has been carried out. In philosophy, used to denote something is supposed without empirical evidence. In everyday speech, it denotes something occurring or being known before the event.


 APUD ,,,,, in the writings of ,,,,, Used in scholarly works to cite a reference at second hand


 AQUA (AQ.) ,,,,, water ,,,,, 


 AQUA FORTIS ,,,,, strong water ,,,,, Refers to nitric acid


 AQUA PURA ,,,,, pure water ,,,,, Or, "clear water" or "clean water"


 AQUA REGIA ,,,,, royal water ,,,,, Refers to a mixture of hydrochloric acid and nitric acid, thus called because of its ability to dissolve gold


 AQUA VITAE ,,,,, water of life ,,,,, "Spirit of Wine" in many English texts. Used to refer to various native distilled beverages, such as whisky (_uisge beatha_) in Scotland and Ireland, gin in the Netherlands, brandy (_eau de vie_) in France, and akvavit in Scandinavia.


 AQUILA NON CAPIT MUSCAS ,,,,, an eagle does not catch flies ,,,,, Or, "a noble or important person does not deal with insignificant matters"


 ARARE LITUS ,,,,, to plough the seashore ,,,,, Desiderius Erasmus, _Adagia_ (AD 1508); meaning "wasted labor"


 ARBITER ELEGANTIARUM ,,,,, judge of tastes ,,,,, One who prescribes, rules on, or is a recognized authority on matters of social behavior and taste. Said of Petronius. Sometimes found in the singular as _arbiter elegantiae_ ("judge of taste").


 ARCANA IMPERII ,,,,, the secrets of power ,,,,, Originally used by Tacitus to refer to the state secrets and unaccountable acts of the Roman imperial government


 ARCANUM BONI TENORIS ANIMAE ,,,,, The secret behind a good mood ,,,,, Motto of the Starobrno Brewery in Brno


 ARCUS SENILIS ,,,,, bow of an old person ,,,,, An opaque circle around the cornea of the eye, often seen in elderly people


 ARDUUS AD SOLEM ,,,,, Striving towards the Sun ,,,,, Motto of Victoria University of Manchester


 ARGENTUM ALBUM ,,,,, white silver ,,,,, Also "silver coin"; mentioned in the _Domesday Book_; signifies bullion or silver uncoined


 ARGUENDO ,,,,, for arguing ,,,,, Or, "for the sake of argument". Said when something is done purely in order to discuss a matter or illustrate a point. E. g., "let us assume, _arguendo_, that your claim is correct."


 ARGUMENTUM ,,,,, argument ,,,,, Or "reasoning", "inference", "appeal", or "proof". The plural is _argumenta_. Commonly used in the names of logical arguments and fallacies, preceding phrases such as _a silentio_ (by silence), _ad antiquitatem_ (to antiquity), _ad baculum_ (to the stick), _ad captandum_ (to capturing), _ad consequentiam_ (to the consequence), _ad crumenam_ (to the purse), _ad feminam_ (to the woman), _ad hominem_ (to the person), _ad ignorantiam_ (to ignorance), _ad invidiam_ (to hatred - appealing to low passions), _ad judicium_ (to judgment), _ad lazarum_ (to poverty), _ad logicam_ (to logic), _ad metum_ (to fear), _ad misericordiam_ (to pity), _ad nauseam_ (to nausea), _ad novitatem_ (to novelty), _ad personam_ (to the character), _ad numerum_ (to the number), _ad odium_ (to spite), _ad populum_ (to the people), _ad temperantiam_ (to moderation), _ad verecundiam_ (to reverence), _ex silentio_ (from silence), _in terrorem_ (into terror), and _e contrario_ (from/to the opposite).


 ARS CELARE ARTEM ,,,,, art [is] to conceal art ,,,,, An aesthetic ideal that good art should appear natural rather than contrived. Of medieval origin, but often incorrectly attributed to Ovid.^([4])


 ARS GRATIA ARTIS ,,,,, art for the sake of art ,,,,, Translated into Latin from Baudelaire's "_L'art pour l'art_". Motto of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. While symmetrical for the logo of MGM, the better word order in Latin is "Ars artis gratia".


 ARS LONGA, VITA BREVIS ,,,,, art is long, life is short ,,,,, Seneca, _De Brevitate Vitae_, 1.1, translating a phrase of Hippocrates that is often used out of context. The "art" referred to in the original aphorism was the craft of medicine, which took a lifetime to acquire.


 ARTE ET LABORE ,,,,, by art and by labour ,,,,, Motto of Blackburn Rovers F.C.


 ARTE ET MARTE ,,,,, by skill and valour ,,,,, Motto of the Electrical and Mechanical Engineering (EME) Branch of the Canadian Forces


 ARTIS BOHEMIAE AMICIS ,,,,, Friends of Czech Arts ,,,,, Award of the Minister of Culture of the Czech Republic for the promotion of the positive reputation of Czech culture abroad


 ASINUS AD LYRAM ,,,,, an ass to the lyre ,,,,, Desiderius Erasmus, _Adagia_ (AD 1508); meaning "an awkward or incompetent individual"


 ASINUS ASINUM FRICAT ,,,,, the jackass rubs the jackass ,,,,, Used to describe 2 persons who are lavishing excessive praise on one another


 ASSECURATUS NON QUAERIT LUCRUM SED AGIT NE IN DAMNO SIT ,,,,, the assured does not seek profit but makes [it his profit] that he not be in loss ,,,,, Refers to the insurance principle that the indemnity can not be larger than the loss


 ASTRA INCLINANT, SED NON OBLIGANT ,,,,, the stars incline us, they do not bind us ,,,,, Refers to the distinction of free will from astrological determinism


 AUCTORES VARII ,,,,, various authors ,,,,, Used in bibliography for books, texts, publications, or articles that have more than 3 collaborators


 AUCTORITAS ,,,,, authority ,,,,, Level of prestige a person had in Roman society


 AUCTORITAS NON VERITAS FACIT LEGEM ,,,,, authority, not truth, makes law ,,,,, This formula appears in the 1668 Latin revised edition of Thomas Hobbes's _Leviathan_, book 2, chapter 26, p. 133.


 AUDACIA PRO MURO ET SCUTO OPUS ,,,,, boldness is our wall, action is our shield ,,,,, Cornelis Jol,^([5]) in a bid to rally his rebellious captains to fight and conquer the Spanish treasure fleet in 1638.


 AUDACTER CALUMNIARE, SEMPER ALIQUID HAERET ,,,,, slander boldly, something always sticks ,,,,, Francis Bacon, _De Augmentis Scientiarum_ (AD 1623)


 AUDAX AT FIDELIS ,,,,, bold but faithful ,,,,, Motto of Queensland, Australia


 AUDEAMUS ,,,,, let us dare ,,,,, Motto of the Canadian Special Operations Regiment [CSOR] on their regimental coat of arms; of Otago University Students' Association, a direct response to the university's motto of _sapere aude_ ("dare to be wise"); and of Champlain College in Burlington, Vermont.


 AUDEMUS JURA NOSTRA DEFENDERE ,,,,, we dare to defend our rights ,,,,, Motto of the State of Alabama, adopted in AD 1923; translated into Latin from a paraphrase of the stanza "Men who their duties know / But know their rights, and knowing, dare maintain" from William Jones, "What Constitutes a State?"


 AUDENTES FORTUNA IUVAT ,,,,, fortune favors the bold ,,,,, From Virgil, _Aeneid_, Book 10, 284, where the first word is in the archaic form _audentis_. Allegedly the last words of Pliny the Elder before he left the docks at Pompeii to rescue people from the eruption of Vesuvius in 79. Often quoted as _audaces fortuna iuvat_. Also the motto of the Portuguese Army Commandos and the USS Montpelier (SSN-765) in the latter form.


 AUDERE EST FACERE ,,,,, to dare is to do ,,,,, Motto of Tottenham Hotspur F.C.


 AUDI ALTERAM PARTEM ,,,,, hear the other side ,,,,, Legal principle; also worded as _audiatur et altera pars_ ("let the other side be heard also")


 AUDIO HOSTEM ,,,,, I hear the enemy ,,,,, Motto of the 845 NAS Royal Navy


 AUDI, VIDE, TACE ,,,,, hear, see, be silent ,,,,, 


 AUREA MEDIOCRITAS ,,,,, golden mean ,,,,, From Horace's _Odes_, 2, 10. Refers to the ethical goal of reaching a virtuous middle ground between two sinful extremes. The golden mean concept is common to many philosophers, chiefly Aristotle.


 AURI SACRA FAMES ,,,,, accursed hunger for gold ,,,,, From Virgil, _Aeneid_, Book 3, 57. Later quoted by Seneca as _quod non mortalia pectora coges, auri sacra fames_ ("what do not you force mortal hearts [to do], accursed hunger for gold").


 AURIBUS TENEO LUPUM ,,,,, I hold a wolf by the ears ,,,,, Common ancient proverb, this version from Terence. It indicates that one is in a dangerous situation where both holding on and letting go could be deadly. A modern version is "to have a tiger by the tail".


 AURORA AUSTRALIS ,,,,, southern dawn ,,,,, The Southern Lights, an aurora that appears in the Southern Hemisphere. It is less well-known than the Northern Lights (_aurorea borealis_). The _Aurora Australis_ is also the name of an Antarctic icebreaker ship.


 AURORA BOREALIS ,,,,, northern dawn ,,,,, The Northern Lights, an aurora that appears in the Northern Hemisphere.


 AURORA MUSIS AMICA ,,,,, dawn is a friend to the muses ,,,,, Title of a distich by Iohannes Christenius (1599–1672): "Conveniens studiis non est nox, commoda lux est; / Luce labor bonus est et bona nocte quies." ("Night is not suitable for studying, daylight is; / working by light is good, as is rest at night."); in Nihus, Barthold (1642). _Epigrammata disticha_. Johannes Kinckius. 


 AURUM POTESTAS EST ,,,,, gold is power ,,,,, Motto of the fictional Fowl Family in the Artemis Fowl series, written by Eoin Colfer


 AUSPICIUM MELIORIS AEVI ,,,,, hope/token of a better age ,,,,, Motto of the Order of St Michael and St George and of Raffles Institution in Singapore


 AUT CAESAR AUT NIHIL ,,,,, either Caesar or nothing ,,,,, Denotes an absolute aspiration to become the Emperor, or the equivalent supreme magistrate, and nothing else. More generally, "all or nothing". A personal motto of Cesare Borgia. Charles Chaplin also used the phrase in The Great Dictator to ridicule Hynkel's (Chaplin's parody of Hitler) ambition for power, but substituted "nulles" for "nihil".


 AUT CONSILIIS AUT ENSE ,,,,, either by meeting or the sword ,,,,, I. e., either through reasoned discussion or through war. It was the first motto of Chile.


 AUT CUM SCUTO AUT IN SCUTO ,,,,, either with shield or on shield ,,,,, Or, "do or die" or "no retreat". A Greek expression («Ἢ τὰν ἢ ἐπὶ τᾶς») that Spartan mothers said to their sons as they departed for battle. It refers to the practices that a Greek hoplite would drop his cumbersome shield in order to flee the battlefield, and a slain warrior would be borne home atop his shield.


 AUT IMITERIS AUT ODERIS ,,,,, imitate or loathe it ,,,,, Seneca the Younger, _Epistulae morales ad Lucilium_, 7:7. From the full phrase: "necesse est aut imiteris aut oderis" ("you must either imitate or loathe the world").


 AUT NECA AUT NECARE ,,,,, either kill or be killed ,,,,, Also: "neca ne neceris" ("kill lest you be killed")


 AUT PAX AUT BELLUM ,,,,, either peace or war ,,,,, Motto of the Gunn Clan


 AUT SIMUL STABUNT AUT SIMUL CADENT ,,,,, they will either stand together or fall together ,,,,, Said of two situations that can only occur simultaneously: if one ends, so does the other, and vice versa.^([6])


 AUT VIAM INVENIAM AUT FACIAM ,,,,, I will either find a way or make one ,,,,, Hannibal


 AUT VINCERE AUT MORI ,,,,, either to conquer or to die ,,,,, General pledge of _victoria aut mors_ ("victory or death"). Motto of the Higgenbotham and Higginbottom families of Cheshire, England; participants in the War of the Roses. Also the motto for the United States 1st Fighter Wing, Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.


 AVE ATQUE VALE ,,,,, hail and farewell ,,,,, Catullus, _Carmen_ 101, addressed to his deceased brother


 AVE EUROPA NOSTRA VERA PATRIA ,,,,, hail Europe, our true fatherland ,,,,, Anthem of Imperium Europa


 AVE IMPERATOR, MORITURI TE SALUTANT ,,,,, Hail, Emperor! Those who are about to die salute you! ,,,,, From Suetonius' _The Twelve Caesars_, _Claudius_ 21. A salute and plea for mercy recorded on one occasion by naumachiarii–captives and criminals fated to die fighting during mock naval encounters. Later versions included a variant of "We who are about to die", and this translation is sometimes aided by changing the Latin to _nos morituri te salutamus_.


 AVE MARIA ,,,,, Hail, Mary ,,,,, Roman Catholic prayer of intercession asking St. Mary, the Mother of Jesus Christ to pray for the petitioner


 AVE MATER ANGLIAE ,,,,, Hail, Mother of England ,,,,, Motto of Canterbury, England


 BARBA CRESCIT CAPUT NESCIT ,,,,, beard grows, head doesn't grow wiser 


 BARBA NON FACIT PHILOSOPHUM ,,,,, a beard doesn't make one a philosopher 


 BARBA TENUS SAPIENTES ,,,,, wise as far as the beard ,,,,, Wise only in appearance. From Erasmus's collection of Adages.


 BEATA VIRGO MARIA (BVM) ,,,,, Blessed Virgin Mary ,,,,, A common name in the Roman Catholic Church for Mary, the mother of Jesus. The genitive, _Beatae Mariae Virginis_ (BMV), occurs often as well, appearing with such words as _horae_ (hours), _litaniae_ (litanies) and _officium_ (office).


 BEATAE MEMORIAE ,,,,, of blessed memory ,,,,, See _in memoriam_


 BEATI PAUPERES SPIRITU ,,,,, Blessed in spirit [are] the poor. ,,,,, A Beatitude from Matthew 5:3 in the Vulgate: _beati pauperes spiritu, quoniam ipsorum est regnum caelorum_ "Blessed in spirit [are] the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of the heavens".


 BEATI POSSIDENTES ,,,,, blessed [are] those who possess ,,,,, Translated from Euripides


 BEATI QUI AMBULANT LEGE DOMINI ,,,,, Blessed are they who walk in the law of the Lord ,,,,, Inscription above the entrance to St. Andrew's Church (New York City), based on Psalm 119:1


 BEATUS HOMO QUI INVENIT SAPIENTIAM ,,,,, blessed is the man who finds wisdom ,,,,, from Proverbs 3:13; set to music in a 1577 motet of the same name by Orlando di Lasso.


 BELLA, MULIER QUI HOMINUM ALLICIT ET ACCIPIT EOS PER FORTIS ,,,,, War, a woman who lures men and takes them by force ,,,,, Latin proverb^([_citation\ needed_])


 BELLA GERANT ALII ,,,,, Let others wage war ,,,,, Originally from Ovid, _Heroides_ 13.84,^([7]) where Laodamia is writing to her husband Protesilaus who is at the Trojan War. She begs him to stay out of danger, but he was in fact the first Greek to die at Troy. Also used of the Habsburg marriages of 1477 and 1496, written as _bella gerant alii, tu felix Austria nube_ (let others wage war; you, happy Austria, marry). Said by King Matthias.


 Protesilaus amet! ,,,,, Protesilaus should love! ,,,,, 


 BELLA DETESTA MATRIBUS ,,,,, war hateful to mothers ,,,,, from Horace


 BELLO ET JURE SENESCO ,,,,, I grow old through war and law ,,,,, Motto of the House of d'Udekem d'Acoz (nl)


 BELLUM OMNIUM CONTRA OMNES ,,,,, war of all against all ,,,,, A phrase used by Thomas Hobbes to describe the state of nature


 BELLUM SE IPSUM ALET ,,,,, war feeds itself ,,,,, 


 BIBLIA PAUPERUM ,,,,, Paupers' Bible ,,,,, Tradition of biblical pictures displaying the essential facts of Christian salvation


 BIBO ERGO SUM ,,,,, I drink, therefore I am ,,,,, A play on "cogito ergo sum", "I think therefore I am"


 BIS DAT QUI CITO DAT ,,,,, he gives twice, who gives promptly ,,,,, A gift given without hesitation is as good as two gifts.


 BIS IN DIE (BID) ,,,,, twice in a day ,,,,, Medical shorthand for "twice a day"


 BONA FIDE ,,,,, in good faith ,,,,, In other words, "well-intentioned", "fairly". In modern contexts, often has connotations of "genuinely" or "sincerely". _Bona fides_ is not the plural (which would be _bonis fidebus_), but the nominative, and means simply "good faith". Opposite of _mala fide_.


 BONA NOTABILIA ,,,,, note-worthy goods ,,,,, In law, if a person dying has goods, or good debts, in another diocese or jurisdiction within that province, besides his goods in the diocese where he dies, amounting to a certain minimum value, he is said to have _bona notabilia_; in which case, the probat of his will belongs to the archbishop of that province.


 BONA OFFICIA ,,,,, good services ,,,,, A nation's offer to mediate in disputes between two other nations


 BONA PATRIA ,,,,, goods of a country ,,,,, A jury or assize of countrymen, or good neighbors


 BONA VACANTIA ,,,,, vacant goods ,,,,, United Kingdom legal term for ownerless property that passes to The Crown


 BONI PASTORIS EST TONDERE PECUS NON DEGLUBERE ,,,,, it is a good shepherd's [job] to shear his flock, not to flay them ,,,,, Tiberius reportedly said this to his regional commanders, as a warning against taxing the populace excessively.


 BONO MALUM SUPERATE ,,,,, Overcome evil with good ,,,,, Motto of Westonbirt School


 BONUM COMMUNE COMMUNITATIS ,,,,, common good of the community ,,,,, Or "general welfare". Refers to what benefits a society, as opposed to _bonum commune hominis_, which refers to what is good for an individual. In the film _Hot Fuzz_, this phrase is chanted by an assembled group of people, in which context it is deliberately similar to another phrase that is repeated throughout the film, which is _The Greater Good_.


 BONUM COMMUNE HOMINIS ,,,,, common good of a man ,,,,, Refers to an individual's happiness, which is not "common" in that it serves everyone, but in that individuals tend to be able to find happiness in similar things.


 BOREAS DOMUS, MARE AMICUS ,,,,, the North is our home, the sea is our friend ,,,,, Motto of Orkney


 BRUTUM FULMEN ,,,,, harmless (or inert) thunderbolt ,,,,, Used to indicate either an empty threat, or a judgement at law which has no practical effect


 BUSILLIS (IT) ,,,,, baffling puzzle, thorny problem ,,,,, John of Cornwall (ca. 1170) was once asked by a scribe what the word meant. It turns out that the original text said _in diebus illis magnis plenae_ (in those days there were plenty of great things), which the scribe misread as _indie busillis magnis plenae_ (in India there were plenty of large _busillis_). This mondegreen has since entered the literature; it occurs in Alessandro Manzoni's novel _The Betrothed_ (1827), in Dostoyevsky's _The Brothers Karamazov_ (1880), and in Andrea Camilleri's Inspector Montalbano series.


 CACOETHES SCRIBENDI ,,,,, insatiable desire to write ,,,,, _Cacoēthes_^([8]) "bad habit", or medically, "malignant disease" is a borrowing of Greek _kakoēthes_.^([9]) The phrase is derived from a line in the _Satires_ of Juvenal: _Tenet insanabile multos scribendi cacoethes_, or "the incurable desire (or itch) for writing affects many". See hypergraphia. 

 CADAVERA VERO INNUMERA ,,,,, truly countless bodies ,,,,, Used by the Romans to describe the aftermath of the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains. 

 CAEDITE EOS. NOVIT ENIM DOMINUS QUI SUNT EIUS. ,,,,, Kill them all. For the Lord knows those who are his. ,,,,, Supposed statement by Abbot Arnaud Amalric before the massacre of Béziers during the Albigensian Crusade, recorded 30 years later, according to Caesarius of Heisterbach. cf. "Kill them all and let God sort them out." 

 CAELUM NON ANIMUM MUTANT QUI TRANS MARE CURRUNT ,,,,, Those who hurry across the sea change the sky [upon them], not their souls or state of mind ,,,,, Hexameter by Horace (_Epistula XI_).^([10]) Seneca shortens it to ANIMUM DEBES MUTARE, NON CAELUM (You must change [your] disposition, not [your] sky) in his _Letter to Lucilium_ XXVIII, 1. 

 CAESAR NON SUPRA GRAMMATICOS ,,,,, Caesar has no authority over the grammarians ,,,,, Political power is limited; it does not include power over grammar.^([11]) 

 CAETERA DESUNT ,,,,, the rest is missing ,,,,, _Caetera_ is Medieval Latin spelling for _cētera_. 

 CALIX MEUS INEBRIANS ,,,,, my cup making me drunk ,,,,, 

 CALAMUS GLADIO FORTIOR ,,,,, The pen is mightier than the sword ,,,,, 

 CAMERA OBSCURA ,,,,, dark chamber ,,,,, An optical device used in drawing, and an ancestor of modern photography. The source of the word _camera_. 

 CANE NERO MAGNA BELLA PERSICA ,,,,, _Tell, oh Nero, of the great wars of Persia_ ,,,,, Perfectly correct latin sentence usually reported as funny from modern Italians because the same exact words, in today's dialect of Rome, mean _"A black dog eats a beautiful peach"_, which has a ridiculously different meaning. 

 CANES PUGNACES ,,,,, war dogs or fighting dogs ,,,,, 

 CANIS CANEM EDIT ,,,,, dog eats dog ,,,,, Refers to a situation where nobody is safe from anybody, each man for himself. 

 CAPAX DEI ,,,,, capable of receiving God ,,,,, From Augustine, _De Trinitate_ XIV, 8.11: _Mens eo ipso imago Dei est quo eius capax est_,^([12]) "The mind is the image of God, in that it is capable of Him and can be partaker of Him." 

 CAPAX INFINITI ,,,,, holding the infinite ,,,,, Capability of achieving goals by force of many instead of a single individual. 

 CAPUT INTER NUBILA (CONDIT) ,,,,, (she plunges) [her] head in the clouds ,,,,, So aggrandized as to be beyond practical (earthly) reach or understanding (from Virgil's Aeneid and the shorter form appears in John Locke's _Two Treatises of Government_) 

 CAPUT MORTUUM ,,,,, dead head ,,,,, Originally an alchemical reference to the _dead head_ or _worthless residue_ left over from a reaction. Also used to refer to a freeloader or worthless element. 

 CARITAS CHRISTI ,,,,, The love of Christ ,,,,, It implies a command to love as Christ loved. Motto of St. Francis Xavier High School located in West Meadowlark Park, Edmonton. 

 CARITAS IN VERITATE ,,,,, _Charity in Truth_ ,,,,, Pope Benedict XVI's third encyclical. 

 CARPE DIEM ,,,,, seize the day ,,,,, An exhortation to live for today. From Horace, _Odes_ I, 11.8. _Carpere_ refers to plucking of flowers or fruit. The phrase COLLIGE VIRGO ROSAS has a similar sense. 

 CARPE NOCTEM ,,,,, seize the night ,,,,, An exhortation to make good use of the night, often used when _carpe diem_, q.v., would seem absurd, e.g., when observing a deep-sky object or conducting a Messier marathon or engaging in social activities after sunset. 

 CARPE VINUM ,,,,, seize the wine ,,,,, 

 CARTHAGO DELENDA EST ,,,,, Carthage must be destroyed ,,,,, The Roman senator Cato the Elder ended every speech after the Second Punic War with _ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam_, literally "For the rest, I am of the opinion that Carthage is to be destroyed." Before the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon in the European Parliament, Daniel Hannan ended all his speeches in a similar way with _Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est_ "The Treaty of Lisbon must be put to a referendum". 

 CASTIGAT RIDENDO MORES ,,,,, One corrects customs by laughing at them ,,,,, Or, "[Comedy/Satire] criticises customs through humour", is a phrase coined by French New Latin poet Jean-Baptiste de Santeul (1630–1697), but sometimes wrongly attributed to his contemporary Molière or to Roman lyric poet Horace. 

 CASUS BELLI ,,,,, event of war ,,,,, Refers to an incident that is the justification or case for war. 

 CAUSA LATET, VIS EST NOTISSIMA ,,,,, The cause is hidden, but the result is well known. ,,,,, Ovid: _Metamorphoses_ IV, 287; motto of Alpha Sigma Phi. 

 CAUSA MORTIS ,,,,, cause of death ,,,,, 

 CAVE ,,,,, beware! ,,,,, especially used by Doctors of Medicine, when they want to warn each other (e.g.: "cave nephrolithiases" in order to warn about side effects of an uricosuric). Spoken aloud in some British public schools by pupils to warn each other of impending authority. 

 CAVE CANEM ,,,,, Beware of the dog ,,,,, Earliest written example is in the Satyricon of Petronius, circa 1st century C.E. 

 CAVEAT EMPTOR ,,,,, let the buyer beware ,,,,, The purchaser is responsible for checking whether the goods suit his need. Phrases modeled on this one replace _emptor_ with _lector_, _subscriptor_, _venditor_, _utilitor_: "reader", "signer", "seller", "user". 

 CAVEAT VENDITOR ,,,,, let the seller beware ,,,,, It is a counter to _caveat emptor_ and suggests that sellers can also be deceived in a market transaction. This forces the seller to take responsibility for the product and discourages sellers from selling products of unreasonable quality. 

 CEDANT ARMA TOGAE ,,,,, let arms yield to the gown ,,,,, "Let military power yield to civilian power", Cicero, _De Officiis_ I:77. Former motto of the Territory of Wyoming. See also Toga 

 CEDERE NESCIO ,,,,, I Know Not How To Yield ,,,,, Motto of HMAS _Norman_ 

 CELER - SILENS - MORTALIS ,,,,, Swift-Silent-Deadly ,,,,, Motto of United States Marine Corps Reconnaissance Units - especially USMC FORCE RECON units - the Force Reconnaissance companies, also known as FORCE RECON, are one of the United States Marine Corps Special Operations Capable forces (SOC) that provide essential elements of military intelligence to the command element of the Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF); supporting their task force commanders, and their subordinate operating units of the Fleet Marine Force (FMF). 

 CELERIUS QUAM ASPARAGI COCUNTUR ,,,,, more swiftly than asparagus [stem]s are cooked ,,,,, Or simply "faster than cooking asparagus". A variant of the Roman phrase _velocius quam asparagi coquantur_, using a different adverb and an alternative mood and spelling of _coquere_. 

 CEPI CORPUS ,,,,, I have taken the body ,,,,, In law, it is a return made by the sheriff, upon a _capias_, or other process to the like purpose; signifying, that he has taken the body of the party. See also habeas corpus. 

 CERTUM EST QUOD CERTUM REDDI POTEST ,,,,, it is certain, whatever can be rendered certain ,,,,, Or "... if it can be rendered certain." Often used in law when something is not known, but can be ascertained (e.g. the purchase price on a sale which is to be determined by a third-party valuer) 

 CESSANTE RATIONE LEGIS CESSAT IPSA LEX ,,,,, when the reason for the law ceases, the law itself ceases ,,,,, A rule of law becomes ineffective when the reason for its application has ceased to exist or does not correspond to the reality anymore. By Gratian. 

 CETERA DESUNT ,,,,, the rest are missing ,,,,, Also spelled "caetera desunt". 

 CETERIS PARIBUS ,,,,, all other things being equal ,,,,, That is, disregarding or eliminating extraneous factors in a situation. 

 CHARTA PARDONATIONIS SE DEFENDENDO ,,,,, a paper of pardon to defend oneself ,,,,, The form of a pardon for killing another man in self-defence (see manslaughter). 

 CHARTA PARDONATIONIS UTLAGARIAE ,,,,, a paper of pardon to the outlaw ,,,,, The form of a pardon of a man who is outlawed. Also called _perdonatio utlagariae_. 

 CHRISTIANOS AD LEONES ,,,,, [Throw the] Christians to the lions! ,,,,, 

 CHRISTO ET DOCTRINAE ,,,,, For Christ and Learning ,,,,, The motto of Furman University. 

 CHRISTUS NOS LIBERAVIT ,,,,, Christ has freed us ,,,,, title of volume I, book 5, chapter XI of Les Misérables by Victor Hugo. 

 CHRISTUS REX ,,,,, Christ the King ,,,,, A Christian title for Jesus. 

 CIRCA (C.) _or_ (CA.) ,,,,, around ,,,,, In the sense of "approximately" or "about". Usually used of a date. 

 CIRCULUS IN PROBANDO ,,,,, circle made in testing [a premise] ,,,,, Circular reasoning. Similar term to _circulus vitiosus_. 

 CIRCULUS VITIOSUS ,,,,, vicious circle ,,,,, In logic, begging the question, a fallacy involving the presupposition of a proposition in one of the premises (see _petitio principii_). In science, a positive feedback loop. In economics, a counterpart to the virtuous circle. 

 CITIUS ALTIUS FORTIUS ,,,,, faster, higher, stronger ,,,,, Motto of the modern Olympics. 

 CLAMEA ADMITTENDA IN ITINERE PER ATTURNATUM ,,,,,   ,,,,, A writ whereby the king of England could command the justice to admit one's claim by an attorney, who being employed in the king's service, cannot come in person. 

 CLARERE AUDERE GAUDERE ,,,,, [be] bright, daring, joyful ,,,,, Motto of the Geal family. 

 CLAUSUM FREGIT ,,,,,   ,,,,, A legal action for trespass to land; so called, because the writ demands the person summoned to answer _wherefore he broke the close_ _(quare clausum fregit)_, i.e., why he entered the plaintiff's land. 

 CLAVES SANCTI PETRI ,,,,, the keys of Saint Peter ,,,,, A symbol of the Papacy. 

 CLAVIS AUREA ,,,,, golden key ,,,,, The means of discovering hidden or mysterious meanings in texts, particularly applied in theology and alchemy. 

 CLERICO ADMITTENDO ,,,,, for being made a clerk ,,,,, In law, a writ directed to the bishop, for the admitting a clerk to a benefice upon a _ne admittas_, tried, and found for the party who procures the writ. 

 CLERICO CAPTO PER STATUTUM MERCATORUM ,,,,,   ,,,,, In law, a writ for the delivery of a clerk out of prison, who is imprisoned upon the breach of statute merchant. 

 CLERICO CONVICTO COMMISSO GAOLAE IN DEFECTU ORDINARII DELIBERANDO ,,,,,   ,,,,, In law, a writ for the delivery of a clerk to his ordinary, that was formerly convicted of felony; by reason that his ordinary did not challenge him according to the privilege of clerks. 

 CLERICO INTRA SACROS ORDINES CONSTITUTO NON ELIGENDO IN OFFICIUM ,,,,,   ,,,,, In law, a writ directed to the bailiffs, etc., that have thrust a bailiwick or beadleship upon one in holy orders; charging them to release him. 

 CODEX IURIS CANONICI ,,,,, Book of Canon Law ,,,,, The official code of canon law in the Roman Catholic Church (cf. _Corpus Iuris Canonici_). 

 COGITATIONIS POENAM NEMO PATITUR ,,,,, "No one suffers punishment for mere intent." ,,,,, A Latin legal phrase. See, _State v Taylor_, 47 Or 455, 84 P 82. 

 COGITO ERGO SUM ,,,,, I think, therefore I am. ,,,,, A rationalistic argument used by French philosopher René Descartes to attempt to prove his own existence. 

 COITUS INTERRUPTUS ,,,,, interrupted congress ,,,,, Aborting sexual intercourse prior to ejaculation—the only permitted form of birth control in some religions. 

 COITUS MORE FERARUM ,,,,, congress in the way of beasts ,,,,, A medical euphemism for the doggy-style sexual position. 

 COLLIGE VIRGO ROSAS ,,,,, pick, girl, the roses ,,,,, ------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- -- ------------------ --------------------- --- ----------------- --------------------- --------------------- ---------- Exhortation to enjo y fully the youth, si milar to _Carpe diem_ , from "De rosis nasc entibus" (also titled "Idyllium de rosis") , attributed to Auson ius or Virgil.^([13]) [Waterhouse-gather ye rosebuds-1909.jpg ] "Gather ye rosebu ds while ye may", 190 9, by John William Wa terhouse ------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- -- ------------------ --------------------- --- ----------------- --------------------- --------------------- ---------- 

 COMBINATIO NOVA ,,,,, new combination ,,,,, It is frequently abbreviated _comb. nov._. It is used in the life sciences literature when a new name is introduced, e.g. _Klebsiella granulomatis comb. nov._. 

 COMMUNIBUS ANNIS ,,,,, in common years ,,,,, One year with another; on an average. "Common" here does not mean "ordinary", but "common to every situation" 

 COMMUNIBUS LOCIS ,,,,, in common places ,,,,, A term frequently used among philosophical and other writers, implying some medium, or mean relation between several places; one place with another; on a medium. "Common" here does not mean "ordinary", but "common to every situation" 

 COMMUNIS OPINIO ,,,,, common opinion ,,,,, prevailing doctrine, generally accepted view (in an academic field), scientific consensus; originally _communis opinio doctorum_, "common opinion of the doctors" 

 COMPOS MENTIS ,,,,, in control of the mind ,,,,, Describes someone of sound mind. Sometimes used ironically. Also a legal principle, _non compos mentis_ (not in control of one's faculties), used to describe an insane person. 

 CONCILIO ET LABORE ,,,,, by wisdom and effort ,,,,, Motto of the city of Manchester. 

 CONCORDIA CUM VERITATE ,,,,, in harmony with truth ,,,,, Motto of the University of Waterloo 

 CONCORDIA SALUS ,,,,, well-being through harmony ,,,,, Motto of Montreal. It is also the Bank of Montreal coat of arms and motto. 

 CONCORDIA PARVAE RES CRESCUNT ,,,,, small things grow in harmony ,,,,, Motto of Merchant Taylors' School, Northwood 

 CONDEMNANT QUOD NON INTELLEGUNT ,,,,, They condemn what they do not understand or They condemn because they do not understand ,,,,, The _quod_ here is ambiguous: it may be the relative pronoun or a conjunction. 

 CONDICIO SINE QUA NON ,,,,, condition without which not ,,,,, A required, indispensable condition. Commonly mistakenly rendered with _conditio_ ("seasoning" or "preserving") in place of _condicio_ ("arrangement" or "condition"). 

 CONDITUR IN PETRA ,,,,, it is founded on the rock ,,,,, Motto of Peterhouse Boys' School and Peterhouse Girls' School 

 CONFER (CF.)^([14][15]) ,,,,, compare ,,,,, The abbreviation _cf._ is used in text to suggest a comparison with something else (cf. citation signal). 

 CONFOEDERATIO HELVETICA (C.H.) ,,,,, Helvetian Confederation ,,,,, The official name of Switzerland, hence the use of "CH" for its ISO country code, ".ch" for its Internet domain, and "CHF" for the ISO three-letter abbreviation of its currency, the Swiss franc. 

 CONGREGATIO SANCTISSIMI REDEMPTORIS C.SS.R ,,,,, Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer ,,,,, Redemptorists 

 CONIUNCTIS VIRIBUS ,,,,, with connected strength ,,,,, Or "with united powers". Sometimes rendered _conjunctis viribus_. Motto of Queen Mary, University of London. 

 CONSENSU ,,,,, with consent ,,,,, 

 CONSUETUDO PRO LEGE SERVATUR ,,,,, Custom is held as law. ,,,,, Where there are no specific laws, the matter should be decided by custom;^([16]) established customs have the force of laws.^([17]) Also _consuetudo est altera lex_ (custom is another law) and _consuetudo vincit communem legem_ (custom overrules the common law); see also: Consuetudinary. 

 CONSUMMATUM EST ,,,,, It is completed. ,,,,, The last words of Jesus on the cross in the Latin translation of John 19:30. 

 CONTEMPTUS MUNDI/SAECULI ,,,,, scorn for the world/times ,,,,, Despising the secular world. The monk or philosopher's rejection of a mundane life and worldly values. 

 CONTRA BONOS MORES ,,,,, against good morals ,,,,, Offensive to the conscience and to a sense of justice. 

 CONTRA LEGEM ,,,,, against the law ,,,,, Especially in civil law jurisdictions, said of an understanding of a statute that directly contradicts its wording and thus is neither valid by interpretation nor by analogy. 

 CONTRA PROFERENTEM ,,,,, against the proferror ,,,,, In contract law, the doctrine of contractual interpretation which provides that an ambiguous term will be construed against the party that imposed its inclusion in the contract – or, more accurately, against the interests of the party who imposed it. 

 CONTRA SPEM SPERO ,,,,, I hope against hope ,,,,, Title of a poem by Lesya Ukrainka; also used in the Pentateuch with reference to Abraham the Patriarch. 

 CONTRA VIM MORTIS NON CRESCIT HERBA (OR SALVIA) IN HORTIS ,,,,, No herb (or sage) grows in the gardens against the power of death ,,,,, there is no medicine against death; from various medieval medicinal texts 

 CONTRADICTIO IN TERMINIS ,,,,, contradiction in terms ,,,,, A thing or idea that would embody a contradiction, for example, payment for a gift, or a circle with corners. The fallacy of proposing such a thing. 

 CONTRA PRINCIPIA NEGANTEM NON EST DISPUTANDUM ,,,,, there can be no debate with those who deny the foundations ,,,,, Debate is fruitless when you don't agree on common rules, facts, presuppositions. 

 COR AD COR LOQUITUR ,,,,, heart speaks to heart ,,,,, From Augustine's _Confessions_, referring to a prescribed method of prayer: having a "heart to heart" with God. Commonly used in reference to a later quote by Cardinal John Henry Newman. A motto of Newman Clubs. 

 COR AUT MORS ,,,,, Heart or Death ,,,,, (Your choice is between) The Heart (Moral Values, Duty, Loyalty) or Death (to no longer matter, to no longer be respected as person of integrity.) 

 COR MEUM TIBI OFFERO DOMINE PROMPTE ET SINCERE ,,,,, my heart I offer to you Lord promptly and sincerely ,,,,, John Calvin's personal motto, also adopted by Calvin College 

 COR UNUM ,,,,, one heart ,,,,, A popular school motto. Often used as names for religious and other organisations such as the Pontifical Council Cor Unum. 

 CORAM DEO ,,,,, in the Presence of God ,,,,, A phrase from Christian theology which summarizes the idea of Christians living in the Presence of, under the authority of, and to the honor and glory of God. 

 CORAM NOBIS, CORAM VOBIS ,,,,, in our presence, in your presence ,,,,, Two kinds of writs of error. 

 CORAM POPULO ,,,,, in the presence of the people ,,,,, Thus, openly. 

 CORAM PUBLICO ,,,,, in view of the public ,,,,, 

 CORPUS CHRISTI ,,,,, Body of Christ ,,,,, The name of a feast in the Roman Catholic Church commemorating the Eucharist. It is also the name of a city in Texas, Corpus Christi, Texas, the name of Colleges at Oxford and Cambridge universities, and a controversial play. 

 CORPUS DELICTI ,,,,, body of the offence ,,,,, The fact that a crime has been committed, a necessary factor in convicting someone of having committed that crime; if there was no crime, there can not have been a criminal. 

 CORPUS IURIS CANONICI ,,,,, Body of Canon Law ,,,,, The official compilation of canon law in the Roman Catholic Church (cf. _Codex Iuris Canonici_). 

 CORPUS IURIS CIVILIS ,,,,, Body of Civil Law ,,,,, The body of Roman or civil law. 

 CORPUS VILE ,,,,, worthless body ,,,,, A person or thing fit only to be the object of an experiment, as in the phrase 'Fiat experimentum in corpore vili.' 

 CORRIGENDA ,,,,, things to be corrected ,,,,, 

 CORRUPTIO OPTIMI PESSIMA ,,,,, the corruption of the best is the worst ,,,,, 

 CORRUPTISSIMA RE PUBLICA PLURIMAE LEGES ,,,,, When the republic is at its most corrupt the laws are most numerous ,,,,, Tacitus 

 CORVUS OCULUM CORVI NON ERUIT ,,,,, a raven does not pick out an eye of another raven ,,,,, 

 CORRUPTUS IN EXTREMIS ,,,,, corrupt to the extreme ,,,,, Motto of the fictional Mayor's office in The Simpsons 

 CRAS AMET QUI NUNQUAM AMAVIT; QUIQUE AMAVIT, CRAS AMET ,,,,, May he who has never loved before, love tomorrow; And may he who has loved, love tomorrow as well ,,,,, The refrain from the 'Pervigilium Veneris', a poem which describes a three-day holiday in the cult of Venus, located somewhere in Sicily, involving the whole town in religious festivities joined with a deep sense of nature and Venus as the "procreatrix", the life-giving force behind the natural world. 

 CRAS ES NOSTER ,,,,, Tomorrow, be ours ,,,,, As "The Future is Ours", motto of San Jacinto College, Texas 

 CREATIO EX NIHILO ,,,,, creation out of nothing ,,,,, A concept about creation, often used in a theological or philosophical context. Also known as the 'First Cause' argument in philosophy of religion. Contrasted with _creatio ex materia._ 

 CREDO IN UNUM DEUM ,,,,, I Believe in One God ,,,,, The first words of the Nicene Creed and the Apostles' Creed. 

 CREDO QUIA ABSURDUM EST ,,,,, I believe it because it is absurd ,,,,, A very common misquote of Tertullian's _et mortuus est Dei Filius prorsus credibile quia ineptum est_ (and the Son of God is dead: in short, it is credible because it is unfitting), meaning that it is so absurd to say that God's son has died that it would have to be a matter of belief, rather than reason. The misquoted phrase, however, is commonly used to mock the dogmatic beliefs of the religious (see fideism). This phrase is commonly shortened to _credo quia absurdum_, and is also sometimes rendered _credo quia impossibile est_ (I believe it because it is impossible) or, as Darwin used it in his autobiography, _credo quia incredibile_. 

 CRESCAMUS IN ILLO PER OMNIA ,,,,, May we grow in Him through all things ,,,,, Motto of Cheverus High School. 

 CRESCAT SCIENTIA VITA EXCOLATUR ,,,,, let knowledge grow, let life be enriched ,,,,, Motto of the University of Chicago. 

 CRESCENTE LUCE ,,,,, Light ever increasing ,,,,, Motto of James Cook University. 

 CRESCIT CUM COMMERCIO CIVITAS ,,,,, Civilization prospers with commerce ,,,,, Motto of Claremont McKenna College. 

 CRESCIT EUNDO ,,,,, it grows as it goes ,,,,, State motto of New Mexico, adopted in 1887 as the territory's motto, and kept in 1912 when New Mexico received statehood. Originally from Lucretius' _De rerum natura_ book VI, where it refers in context to the motion of a thunderbolt across the sky, which acquires power and momentum as it goes. 

 CRUCI DUM SPIRO FIDO ,,,,, while I live, I trust in the cross, Whilst I trust in the Cross I have life ,,,,, Motto of the Sisters of Loreto (IBVM) and its associated schools. 

 CUCULLUS NON FACIT MONACHUM ,,,,, The hood does not make the monk ,,,,, William Shakespeare, _Twelfth Night_, Scene I, Act V 48–50 

 CUI BONO ,,,,, Good for whom? ,,,,, "Who benefits?" An adage in criminal investigation which suggests that considering who would benefit from an unwelcome event is likely to reveal who is responsible for that event (cf. _cui prodest_). Also the motto of the Crime Syndicate of America, a fictional supervillain group. The opposite is _cui malo_ (Bad for whom?). 

 CUI PRODEST ,,,,, for whom it advances ,,,,, Short for _cui prodest scelus is fecit_ (for whom the crime advances, he has done it) in Seneca's _Medea_. Thus, the murderer is often the one who gains by the murder (cf. _cui bono_). 

 CUIQUE SUUM ,,,,, to each his own ,,,,, 

 CUIUS EST SOLUM, EIUS EST USQUE AD COELUM ET AD INFEROS ,,,,, Whose the land is, all the way to the sky and to the underworld is his. ,,,,, First coined by Accursius of Bologna in the 13th century. A Roman legal principle of property law that is no longer observed in most situations today. Less literally, "For whosoever owns the soil, it is theirs up to the sky and down to the depths." 

 CUIUS REGIO, EIUS RELIGIO ,,,,, whose region, his religion ,,,,, The privilege of a ruler to choose the religion of his subjects. A regional prince's ability to choose his people's religion was established at the Peace of Augsburg in 1555. 

 CUIUSVIS HOMINIS EST ERRARE, NULLIUS NISI INSIPIENTIS IN ERRORE PERSEVERARE. ,,,,, Anyone can err, but only the fool persists in his fault ,,,,, Cicero, Philippica XII, 5. 

 CULPA ,,,,, fault ,,,,, Also "blame" or "guilt". In law, an act of neglect. In general, guilt, sin, or a fault. See also _mea culpa_. 

 CUM GLADIIS ET FUSTIBUS ,,,,, with swords and clubs ,,,,, From the Bible. Occurs in Matthew 26:47 and Luke 22:52. 

 CUM GLADIO ET SALE ,,,,, with sword and salt ,,,,, Motto of a well-paid soldier. See salary. 

 CUM GRANO SALIS ,,,,, with a grain of salt ,,,,, Not to be taken too seriously or as the literal truth. 

 CUM HOC ERGO PROPTER HOC ,,,,, with this, therefore on account of this ,,,,, Fallacy of assuming that correlation implies causation. 

 CUM LAUDE ,,,,, with praise ,,,,, The standard formula for academic Latin honors in the United States. Greater honors include _magna cum laude_ and _summa cum laude_. 

 CUM MORTUIS IN LINGUA MORTUA ,,,,, with the dead in a dead language ,,,,, Movement from _Pictures at an Exhibition_ by Modest Mussorgsky 

 CUM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDUM SOLUM ,,,,, with the exclusive right to print ,,,,, Copyright notice used in 16th-century England, used for comic effect in _The Taming of the Shrew_ by William Shakespeare 

 CUNCTI ADSINT MERITAEQUE EXPECTENT PRAEMIA PALMAE ,,,,, let all come who by merit deserve the most reward ,,,,, Motto of University College London. 

 CUPIO DISSOLVI ,,,,, desire to be dissolved ,,,,, From the Bible, locution indicating a will to death ("I want to die"). 

 CUR DEUS HOMO ,,,,, Why the God-Man ,,,,, The question attributed to Anselm in his work of by this name, wherein he reflects on why the Christ of Christianity must be both fully Divine and fully Human. Often translated "why did God become Man?" 

 CURA PERSONALIS ,,,,, care for the whole person ,,,,, Motto of Georgetown University School of Medicine and University of Scranton. 

 CURA TE IPSUM ,,,,, take care of your own self ,,,,, An exhortation to physicians, or experts in general, to deal with their own problems before addressing those of others. 

 CURRICULUM VITAE ,,,,, course of life ,,,,, An overview of a person's life and qualifications, similar to a résumé. 

 CUSTODI CIVITATEM, DOMINE ,,,,, guard the city, O Lord ,,,,, Motto of the City of Westminster. 

 CUSTOS MORUM ,,,,, keeper of morals ,,,,, A censor. 

 CYGNIS INSIGNIS ,,,,, distinguished by its swans ,,,,, Motto of Western Australia. 

 CYGNUS INTER ANATES ,,,,, swan among ducks ,,,,, 

 DA DEUS FORTUNAE ,,,,, God give fortune/happiness ,,,,, A traditional greeting of Czech brewers. 

 DA MIHI FACTUM, DABO TIBI IUS ,,,,, give me the fact, I will give you the law ,,,,, Also _da mihi facta, dabo tibi ius_ (plural "facta" (facts) for the singular "factum"). A legal principle of Roman law that parties to a suit should present the facts and the judge will rule on the law that governs them. Related to _iura novit curia_ (the court knows the law). 

 DAMNANT QUOD NON INTELLEGUNT ,,,,, They condemn what they do not understand ,,,,, Paraphrase of Quintilianus, _De Institutione Oratoria_, Book 10, Chapter 1, 26: - _Modesto tamen et circumspecto iudicio de tantis viris pronuntiandum est, ne, quod plerisque accidit, DAMNENT QUAE NON INTELLEGUNT._ - Yet students must pronounce with diffidence and circumspectio n on the merits of such illustrious characters, lest, as is the case with many, THEY CONDEMN WHAT THEY DO NOT UNDERSTAND. (translated by Rev. John Selby Watson) 

 DAMNATIO AD BESTIAS ,,,,, condemnation to [the] beasts ,,,,, Colloquially, "thrown to the lions". 

 DAMNATIO MEMORIAE ,,,,, damnation of memory ,,,,, The ancient Roman custom by which it was pretended that disgraced Romans, especially former emperors), never existed, by eliminating all records and likenesses of them. 

 DAMNUM ABSQUE INJURIA ,,,,, damage without injury ,,,,, Meaning a loss that results from no one's wrongdoing. In Roman law, a person is not responsible for unintended, consequential injury to another that results from a lawful act. This protection does not necessarily apply to unintended damage caused by one's negligence or folly. 

 DAT DEUS INCREMENTUM or DEUS DAT INCREMENTUM ,,,,, God gives growth ,,,,, Motto of several schools. 

 DATA VENIA ,,,,, with due respect / given the excuse ,,,,, Used before disagreeing with someone. 

 DATUM PERFICIEMUS MUNUS ,,,,, We shall accomplish the mission assigned ,,,,, Motto of Batalhão de Operações Policiais Especiais (BOPE), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 

 DE BENE ESSE ,,,,, as well done ,,,,, In law, a _de bene esse_ deposition is used to preserve the testimony of a witness who is expected not to be available to appear at trial and be cross-examined. 

 DE BONIS ASPORTATIS ,,,,, carrying goods away ,,,,, In law, trespass _de bonis asportatis_ was the traditional name for larceny, i.e., the unlawful theft of chattels (moveable goods). 

 DECESSIT SINE PROLE ,,,,, died without issue ,,,,, Used in genealogical records, often abbreviated as _d.s.p._, to indicate a person who died without having had any children. 

 DECESSIT SINE PROLE LEGITIMA ,,,,, died without legitimate issue ,,,,, Used in genealogical records, often abbreviated as _d.s.p.l._, to indicate a person who died without having had any children with a spouse. 

 DECESSIT SINE PROLE MASCULA SUPERSTITE ,,,,, died without surviving male issue ,,,,, Used in genealogical records, often abbreviated as _d.s.p.m._, to indicate a person who died without having had any male children who survived, i.e., outlived, him. 

 DECESSIT SINE PROLE MASCULA LEGITIMA ,,,,, died without legitimate male issue ,,,,, Used in genealogical records in cases of nobility or other hereditary titles, often abbreviated as _d.s.p.m.l._ or _d.s.p.m. legit_, to indicate a person who died without having had any legitimate male children (indicating there were illegitimate male children) 

 DECESSIT SINE PROLE SUPERSTITE ,,,,, died without surviving issue ,,,,, Used in genealogical records, often abbreviated as _d.s.p.s._, to indicate a person who died without having had any children who survived, i.e., outlived him. 

 DECESSIT VITA MATRIS ,,,,, died in the lifetime of the mother ,,,,, Used in genealogical records, often abbreviated as _d.v.m._, to indicate a person who predeceased his mother. 

 DECESSIT VITA PATRIS ,,,,, died in the lifetime of the father ,,,,, Used in genealogical records, often abbreviated as _d.v.p._, to indicate a person who predeceased his father. 

 DECUS ET TUTAMEN ,,,,, an ornament and a safeguard ,,,,, A phrase from the _Aeneid_ of Virgil. Inscription on British one-pound coins. Originally inscribed on coins of the 17th century, it refers to the inscribed edge of the coin as a protection against the clipping of its precious metal. 

 DE DATO ,,,,, of the date ,,,,, Used, e.g., in "as we agreed in the meeting d.d. 26th May 2006". 

 DE FACTO ,,,,, by deed ,,,,, Said of something that is the actual state of affairs, in contrast to something's legal or official standing, which is described as _de jure_. _De facto_ refers to "the way things really are" rather than what is officially presented as the fact of the matter in question. 

 DE PRAESCIENTIA DEI ,,,,, from/through the foreknowledge of God ,,,,, Motto of the Worshipful Company of Barbers. 

 DEFENDIT NUMERUS ,,,,, there is safety in numbers ,,,,, 

 DE FIDELI ,,,,, with faithfulness ,,,,, A clerk of a court makes this declaration when he is appointed, by which he promises to perform his duties faithfully as a servant of the court. 

 DE FIDELI ADMINISTRATIONE ,,,,, of faithful administration ,,,,, Describes an oath taken to faithfully administer the duties of a job or office, like that taken by a court reporter.^([18]) 

 DE FUTURO ,,,,, regarding the future ,,,,, Usually used in the context of "at a future time". 

 DE GUSTIBUS NON EST DISPUTANDUM ,,,,, of tastes there is nothing to be disputed ,,,,, Less literally, "there is no accounting for taste", because they are judged subjectively and not objectively: everyone has his own and none deserve preminence. The complete phrase is "de gustibus et coloribus non est disputandum" ("when we talk about tastes and colours there is nothing to be disputed"). Probably of Scholastic origin; see Wiktionary. 

 DEI GRATIA REGINA ,,,,, By the Grace of God, Queen ,,,,, Also _Dei Gratia Rex_ ("By the Grace of God, King"). Abbreviated as D G REG preceding _Fidei Defensor_ (F D) on British pound coins, and as D G Regina on Canadian coins. 

 DE INTEGRO ,,,,, again, a second time ,,,,, 

 DE JURE ,,,,, by law ,,,,, "Official", in contrast with _de facto_; analogous to "in principle", whereas _de facto_ is to "in practice". In other contexts, it can mean "according to law", "by right", and "legally". 

 DE LEGE FERENDA ,,,,, of/from law to be passed ,,,,, 

 DE LEGE LATA ,,,,, of/from law passed / of/from law in force ,,,,, 

 DE MINIMIS NON CURAT LEX ,,,,, The law does not care about the smallest things. ,,,,, A court does not care about small, trivial things. A case must have some importance in order for a court to hear it. See "de minimis non curat praetor". 

 DE MINIMIS NON CURAT PRAETOR ,,,,, the commander does not care about the smallest things. ,,,,, Also, "the chief magistrate does not concern himself with trifles." Trivial matters are no concern of a high official; cf. _aquila non capit muscas_ (the eagle does not catch flies). Sometimes _rex_ (king) or _lex_ (law) is used in place of _praetor_. _De minimis_ is a legal phrase referring to things unworthy of the law's attention. 

 DE MORTUIS AUT BENE AUT NIHIL ,,,,, about the dead, either well or nothing ,,,,, Less literally, "speak well of the dead or not at all"; cf. _de mortuis nil nisi bonum_. 

 DE MORTUIS NIL NISI BONUM ,,,,, about the dead, nothing unless a good thing ,,,,, From _de mortuis nil nisi bonum dicendum est_ ("nothing must be said about the dead except the good"), attributed by Diogenes Laërtius to Chilon. In legal contexts, this quotation is used with the opposite meaning: defamation of a deceased person is not a crime. In other contexts, it refers to taboos against criticizing the recently deceased. 

 DE NOBIS FABULA NARRATUR ,,,,, about us is the story told ,,,,, Thus: "their story is our story". Originally it referred to the end of Rome's dominance. Now often used when comparing any current situation to a past story or event. 

 DE NOVO ,,,,, from the new ,,,,, "Anew" or "afresh". In law, a trial _de novo_ is a retrial. In biology, _de novo_ means newly synthesized, and a _de novo_ mutation is a mutation that neither parent possessed or transmitted. In economics, _de novo_ refers to newly founded companies, and _de novo_ banks are state banks that have been in operation for five years or less. (Cf. _ex novo_) 

 DE OMNI RE SCIBILI ET QUIBUSDAM ALIIS ,,,,, about every knowable thing, and even certain other things ,,,,, The Italian scholar Giovanni Pico della Mirandola of the 15th century wrote the _De omni re scibili_ ("concerning every knowable thing") part, and a wag added _et quibusdam aliis_ ("and even certain other things"). 

 DE OMNIBUS DUBITANDUM ,,,,, be suspicious of everything / doubt everything ,,,,, Attributed to the French philosopher René Descartes. It was also Karl Marx's favorite motto and a title of one of Søren Kierkegaard's works, namely, _De Omnibus Dubitandum Est_. 

 DE OPPRESSO LIBER ,,,,, free from having been oppressed ,,,,, Loosely, "to liberate the oppressed". Motto of the United States Army Special Forces.^([19]) 

 DE PROFUNDIS ,,,,, from the depths ,,,,, Meaning from out of the depths of misery or dejection. From the Latin translation of the Vulgate Bible of Psalm 130, of which it is a traditional title in Roman Catholic liturgy. 

 DE RE ,,,,, about/regarding the matter ,,,,, In logic, _de dicto_ statements regarding the truth of a proposition are distinguished from _de re_ statements regarding the properties of a thing itself. 

 DEFENSOR FORTIS ,,,,, Defender of the Force ,,,,, Official motto of the United States Air Force Security Forces (Security Police). 

 DEI GRATIA ,,,,, By the grace of God ,,,,, Part of the full style of a monarch historically considered to be ruling by divine right, notably in the style of the English and British monarch since 1521 

 DEI SUB NUMINE VIGET ,,,,, under God's Spirit she flourishes ,,,,, Motto of Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, United States. 

 DELECTATIO MOROSA ,,,,, peevish delight ,,,,, In Catholic theology, pleasure taken in a sinful thought or imagination, such as brooding on sexual images. As voluntary and complacent erotic fantasizing, without attempt to suppress such thoughts, it is distinct from actual sexual desire. 

 DELEGATA POTESTAS NON POTEST DELEGARI ,,,,, delegated powers can not be [further] delegated ,,,,, A legal principle whereby one to whom certain powers were delegated may not ipso facto re-delegate them to another. A distinction may be had between delegated powers and the additional power to re-delegate them. 

 DELIRANT ISTI ROMANI ,,,,, they are mad, those Romans[!] ,,,,, A Latin translation of René Goscinny's phrase in French _ils sont fous, ces romains!_ or Italian _Sono pazzi questi Romani_. Cf. SPQR, which Obelix frequently used in the _Asterix_ comics. 

 DEO AC VERITATI ,,,,, for God and for truth ,,,,, Motto of Colgate University. 

 DEO CONFIDIMUS ,,,,, in God we trust ,,,,, Motto of Somerset College. 

 DEO DOMUIQUE ,,,,, For God and for home ,,,,, Motto of Methodist Ladies' College, Melbourne. 

 DEO ET PATRIAE ,,,,, For God and country ,,,,, Motto of Regis High School in New York City, New York, United States. 

 DEO GRATIAS ,,,,, Thanks [be] to God ,,,,, A frequent phrase in the Roman Catholic liturgy, especially after the recitation of the first and second readings at Holy Mass in the Ordinary Form and after the recitation of the first reading and the final gospel (of St. John) in the Extraordinary Form. 

 DEO JUVANTE ,,,,, with God's help ,,,,, Motto of Monaco and its monarch, which is inscribed on the royal arms. 

 DEO NON FORTUNA ,,,,, by God, not fortune/luck ,,,,, Motto of the Epsom College in Surrey, England. 

 DEO OPTIMO MAXIMO (DOM) ,,,,, To the best and greatest God ,,,,, Derived from the pagan _Iupiter optimo maximo_ ("to the best and greatest Jupiter"). Printed on bottles of Bénédictine liqueur. 

 DEO PATRIAE LITTERIS ,,,,, For God, country, [and] learning ,,,,, Motto of Scotch College (Melbourne). 

 DEO VOLENTE ,,,,, God willing ,,,,, This was often used in conjunction with a signature at the end of letters. It was used in order to signify that "God willing" this letter will get to you safely, "God willing" the contents of this letter come true. As an abbreviation (simply "D.V.") it is often found in personal letters (in English) of the early 1900s, employed to generally and piously qualify a given statement about a future planned action, that it will be carried out, so long as God wills (see James 4:13-15, which encourages this way of speaking). The motto of Southern Illinois University-Carbondale . 

 DESCENSUS IN CUNICULI CAVUM ,,,,, The descent into the cave of the rabbit ,,,,, Down the rabbit hole. See Alice's Adventures in Wonderland#Famous lines and expressions. 

 DESIDERANTES MELIOREM PATRIAM ,,,,, they desired a better land ,,,,, From Hebrews 11: 16. Adopted as the motto of the Order of Canada. 

 DEUS CARITAS EST ,,,,, God Is Love ,,,,, Title and first words of the first encyclical of Pope Benedict XVI. For other meanings see Deus caritas est (disambiguation). 

 DEUS EX MACHINA ,,,,, a god from a machine ,,,,, From the Greek ἀπὸ μηχανῆς θεός (_apò mēchanēs theós_). A contrived or artificial solution, usually to a literary plot. Refers to the practice in Greek drama of lowering by crane (the _mechanê_) an actor playing a god or goddess onto the stage to resolve an insuperable conflict in the plot. The device is most commonly associated with Euripides. 

 DEUS LUX MEA EST ,,,,, God is my light ,,,,, The motto of The Catholic University of America_._ 

 DEUS MEUMQUE JUS ,,,,, God and my right ,,,,, The principal motto of Scottish Rite Freemasonry. See also _Dieu et mon droit_. 

 DEUS NOBIS HAEC OTIA FECIT ,,,,, God has given us these days of leisure ,,,,, Motto of the city of Liverpool, England. 

 DEUS OTIOSUS ,,,,, God at leisure ,,,,, 

 DEUS SPES NOSTRA ,,,,, God is our hope ,,,,, The motto of Sir Thomas de Boteler, founder of Boteler Grammar School in Warrington in 1526. 

 DEUS VULT ,,,,, God wills it ,,,,, The principal slogan of the Crusades. Motto of Bergen Catholic High School in New Jersey, United States. 

 DICTATUM ERAT (DICT) ,,,,, as previously stated ,,,,, A recent academic substitution for the spacious and inconvenient phrase "as previously stated". Literally, _has been stated_. Compare also "dicta prius"; literally, _said previously_. 

 DICTO SIMPLICITER ,,,,, [from] a maxim, simply ,,,,, I.e. "from a rule without exception." Short for _a dicto simpliciter_, the _a_ is often dropped because it is confused with the English indefinite article. A _dicto simpliciter_ occurs when an acceptable exception is ignored or eliminated. For example, the appropriateness of using opiates is contingent on suffering extreme pain. To justify the recreational use of opiates by referring to a cancer patient or to justify arresting said patient by comparing him to the recreational user would be a _dicto simpliciter_. 

 DICTUM FACTUM ,,,,, what is said is done ,,,,, Motto of United States Navy Fighter Squadron VF-194. 

 DICTUM MEUM PACTUM ,,,,, my word [is] my bond ,,,,, Motto of the London Stock Exchange. 

 DIEM PERDIDI ,,,,, I have lost the day ,,,,, From the Roman Emperor Titus. Recorded in the biography of him by Suetonius in _Lives of the Twelve Caesars_. 

 DIES IRAE ,,,,, Day of wrath ,,,,, Reference to the Judgment Day in Christian eschatology. The title of a famous Medieval Latin hymn by Tommaso da Celano in the 13th century and used in the requiem Mass. 

 DIES NON JURIDICUM ,,,,, Day without judiciary ,,,,, Days under common law (traditionally Sunday), during which no legal process can be served and any legal judgment is invalid. The English Parliament first codified this precept in the reign of King Charles II. 

 DIRIGO ,,,,, I direct ,,,,, In Classical Latin, "I arrange". Motto of the State of Maine, United States; based on a comparison of the State to the star Polaris. 

 DIS ALITER VISUM ,,,,, it seemed otherwise to the gods ,,,,, In other words, the gods have ideas different to those of mortals, and so events do not always occur in the way persons wish them to. Confer Virgil, _Aeneid_, 2: 428. Also confer "Man proposes and God disposes." 

 DIS MANIBUS SACRUM (D.M.S.) ,,,,, Sacred to the ghost-gods ,,,,, Refers to the Manes, i.e. Roman spirits of the dead. Loosely, "to the memory of". A conventional pagan inscription preceding the name of the deceased on his tombstone; often shortened to _dis manibus_ (D.M.), "for the ghost-gods". Preceded in some earlier monuments by _hic situs est_ (H. S. E.), "he lies here". 

 DISCE AUT DISCEDE ,,,,, learn or depart ,,,,, Motto of Royal College, Colombo. 

 DISCE UT SEMPER VICTURUS, VIVE UT CRAS MORITURUS ,,,,, Learn as if always going to live; live as if tomorrow going to die. ,,,,, Attributed to St. Edmund of Abingdon. First seen in Isidoro de Sevilla 

 DISCENDO DISCIMUS ,,,,, while teaching we learn ,,,,, 

 DISCERE FACIENDO ,,,,, learn by doing ,,,,, Motto of California Polytechnic State University, California, United States. 

 DISIECTA MEMBRA ,,,,, scattered limbs ,,,,, I.e., "scattered remains". Paraphrased from Horace, _Satires_, 1, 4, 62, where it is written "_disiecti membra poetae_" (limbs of a scattered poet). 

 DITAT DEUS ,,,,, God enriches ,,,,, Motto of the State of Arizona, United States, adopted in 1911. Probably derived from the translation of the Vulgate Bible of Genesis 14: 23. 

 DIVIDE ET IMPERA ,,,,, divide and rule / "divide and conquer" ,,,,, A Roman maxim adopted by Roman Dictator Julius Caesar, King Louis XI of France and the Italian political author Niccolò Machiavelli. 

 DIXI ,,,,, I have spoken ,,,,, A popular, eloquent expression, usually used in the end of a speech. The implied meaning is that the speaker has said all that he had to say and thus his argument is completed. 

 ["...", ...] DIXIT ,,,,, ["...", ...] said ,,,,, Used to attribute a statement or opinion to its author, rather than the speaker. 

 DO UT DES ,,,,, I give that you may give ,,,,, Often said or written of sacrifices, in which one "gives" and expects a return from the gods. 

 DOCENDO DISCITUR ,,,,, It is learned by teaching / one learns by teaching ,,,,, Attributed to Seneca the Younger. 

 DOCENDO DISCO, SCRIBENDO COGITO ,,,,, I learn by teaching, I think by writing ,,,,, 

 DOLUS SPECIALIS ,,,,, special intent ,,,,, "The ... concept is particular to a few civil law systems and cannot sweepingly be equated with the notions of 'special' or 'specific intent' in common law systems. Of course, the same might equally be said of the concept of 'specific intent', a notion used in the common law almost exclusively within the context of the defense of voluntary intoxication." (Genocide scholar William A. Schabas)^([20]) 

 DOMINE DIRIGE NOS ,,,,, Lord guide us ,,,,, Motto of the City of London, England. 

 DOMINE SALVAM FAC REGINAM ,,,,, God save the queen ,,,,, 

 DOMINE SALVUM FAC REGEM ,,,,, God save the king ,,,,, 

 DOMINICA IN ALBIS [DEPOSITIS] ,,,,, Sunday in [Setting Aside the] White Garments ,,,,, Latin name of the Octave of Easter in the Roman Catholic liturgy. 

 DOMINUS ILLUMINATIO MEA ,,,,, the Lord is my light ,,,,, Motto of the University of Oxford, England. 

 DOMINUS FORTITUDO NOSTRA ,,,,, The Lord is our strength ,,,,, Motto of the Southland College, Philippines. 

 DOMINUS PASTOR ,,,,, the Lord [is our] shepherd ,,,,, Motto of St. John's College and Prep School, Harare, Zimbabwe. 

 DOMINUS VOBISCUM ,,,,, The Lord be with you. ,,,,, A phrase used in the Roman Catholic liturgy, and sometimes in its sermons and homilies, and a general form of greeting among and towards members of Catholic organizations. See also _Pax vobiscum._ 

 DONA NOBIS PACEM ,,,,, give us peace ,,,,, Often set to music, either by itself or as the final phrase of the Agnus Dei prayer of the Holy Mass. Also an ending in the video game _Haunting Ground_. 

 DONATIO MORTIS CAUSA ,,,,, a donation in expectation of death ,,,,, A legal concept in which a person in imminent mortal danger need not satisfy the otherwise requisite consideration to effect a testamentary donation, i.e., a donation by instituting or modifying a will. 

 DRACO DORMIENS NUNQUAM TITILLANDUS ,,,,, a sleeping dragon is never to be tickled ,,,,, Motto of the fictional Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry of the _Harry Potter_ series; translated more loosely in the books as "never tickle a sleeping dragon". 

 DRAMATIS PERSONAE ,,,,, the parts/characters of the play ,,,,, More literally, "the masks of the drama"; the cast of characters of a dramatic work. 

 DUAE TABULAE RASAE IN QUIBUS NIHIL SCRIPTUM EST ,,,,, two blank slates with nothing written upon them ,,,,, Stan Laurel, inscription for the fan club logo of The Sons of the Desert. 

 DUCIMUS ,,,,, we lead ,,,,, Motto of the Royal Canadian Infantry Corps. 

 DUCIT AMOR PATRIAE ,,,,, love of country leads me ,,,,, Motto of the 51st Battalion, Far North Queensland Regiment, Australia. 

 DUCUNT VOLENTEM FATA, NOLENTEM TRAHUNT ,,,,, the fates lead the willing and drag the unwilling ,,,,, Attributed to Lucius Annaeus Seneca (_Sen. Ep. 107.11_). 

 DUCTUS EXEMPLO ,,,,, leadership by example ,,,,, Motto of the United States Marine Corps Officer Candidates School, at the base in Quantico, Virginia, United States. 

 DULCE BELLUM INEXPERTIS ,,,,, war is sweet to the inexperienced ,,,,, Meaning: "war may seem pleasant to those who have never been involved in it, though the experienced know better". Erasmus of Rotterdam. 

 DULCE EST DESIPERE IN LOCO ,,,,, It is sweet on occasion to play the fool. / It is pleasant to relax once in a while. ,,,,, Horace, _Odes_ 4, 12, 28. Also used by George Knapton for the portrait of Sir Bourchier Wrey, 6th Baronet in 1744. 

 DULCE ET DECORUM EST PRO PATRIA MORI ,,,,, It is sweet and honorable to die for the fatherland. ,,,,, Horace, _Odes_ 3, 2, 13. Also used by Wilfred Owen for the title of a poem regarding World War I, _Dulce et Decorum Est_. 

 DULCE ET UTILE ,,,,, a sweet and useful thing / pleasant and profitable ,,,,, Horace, _Ars Poetica_: poetry must be _dulce et utile_, i.e., both enjoyable and instructive. 

 DULCE PERICULUM ,,,,, danger is sweet ,,,,, Horace, _Odes_, 3 25, 16. Motto of the Scottish clan MacAulay. 

 DULCIUS EX ASPERIS ,,,,, sweeter after difficulties ,,,,, Motto of the Scottish clan Fergusson.^([21]) 

 DUM CRESCO SPERO ,,,,, I hope when I grow ,,,,, Motto of The Ravensbourne School. 

 DUM ROMA DELIBERAT SAGUNTUM PERIT ,,,,, while Rome debates, Saguntum is in danger ,,,,, Used when someone has been asked for urgent help, but responds with no immediate action. Similar to _Hannibal ante portas_, but referring to a less personal danger. 

 DUM SPIRO SPERO ,,,,, while I breathe, I hope ,,,,, Cicero. Motto of the State of South Carolina. Motto of the Clan MacLennan. 

 DUM VITA EST, SPES EST ,,,,, while there is life, there is hope ,,,,, 

 DUM VIVIMUS SERVIMUS ,,,,, while we live, we serve ,,,,, Motto of Presbyterian College. 

 DUM VIVIMUS, VIVAMUS ,,,,, while we live, let us live ,,,,, An encouragement to embrace life. Motto inscribed on the sword of the main character of the novel _Glory Road_. 

 DURA LEX SED LEX ,,,,, [the] law [is] harsh, but [it is the] law ,,,,, Ulpian, _Digesta Iustiniani_, Roman jurist of the 3rd century AD. 

 DURA MATER ,,,,, tough mother ,,,,, The outer covering of the brain. 

 DURANTE BENE PLACITO ,,,,, during good pleasure ,,,,, Meaning: "serving at the pleasure of the authority or officer who appointed". A Mediaeval legal Latin phrase. 

 DURANTE MUNERE ,,,,, while in office ,,,,, For example, the Governor General of Canada is _durante munere_ the Chancellor and Principal Companion of the Order of Canada. 

 DUX BELLORUM ,,,,, war leader ,,,,, 

 INITIUM SAPIENTIAE TIMOR DOMINI ,,,,, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. ,,,,, A quotation of the Psalter. Motto of the University of Aberdeen, Scotland. 

 E CAUSA IGNOTA ,,,,, of unknown cause ,,,,, Often used in medicine when the underlying disease causing a symptom is not known. Cf. idiopathic.


 E PLURIBUS UNUM ,,,,, out of many, one ,,,,, Literally, out of more (than one), one. Used on many U.S. coins and inscribed on the Capitol. Also used as the motto of S.L. Benfica. Less commonly written as _EX pluribus unum_.


 ECCE ANCILLA DOMINI ,,,,, behold the handmaiden of the Lord ,,,,, name of oil painting by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, motto of Bishopslea Preparatory School.


 ECCE HOMO ,,,,, Behold the man ,,,,, From the Latin Vulgate Gospel of John 19:5 (Douay-Rheims), where Pontius Pilate speaks these words as he presents Christ, crowned with thorns, to the crowd. It is also the title of Nietzsche's autobiography and of the theme music by Howard Goodall for the ITV comedy _Mr. Bean_, in which the full sung lyric is _Ecce homo qui est faba_ ("Behold the man who is a bean").


 ECCE PANIS ANGELORUM ,,,,, behold the bread of angels ,,,,, A quote from the Lauda Sion, occasionally inscribed near the altar in Catholic churches; it makes reference to the Host; the Eucharist; the bread of Heaven; the Body of Christ. See also: Panis Angelicus.


 EDITIO PRINCEPS ,,,,, first edition ,,,,, The first printed edition of a work.


 EJUSDEM GENERIS ,,,,, of the same kinds, class, or nature ,,,,, From the canons of statutory interpretation. When a list of two or more specific descriptors is followed by more general descriptors, the otherwise wide meaning of the general descriptors must be restricted to the same class, if any, of the specific words that precede them.


 EGO TE ABSOLVO ,,,,, I absolve you ,,,,, Part of the absolution-formula spoken by a priest as part of the sacrament of Penance (cf. _absolvo_).


 EGO TE PROVOCO ,,,,, I challenge you ,,,,, Used as a challenge, "I dare you". Can also be written as _te provoco_


 EHEU FUGACES LABUNTUR ANNI ,,,,, Alas, the fleeting years slip by ,,,,, From Horace's _Odes_ II, 14.


 ELUCEAT OMNIBUS LUX ,,,,, let the light shine out from all ,,,,, The motto of Sidwell Friends School


 EMERITUS ,,,,, veteran ,,,,, Retired from office. Often used to denote a position held at the point of retirement, as an honor, such as _professor emeritus_ or _provost emeritus_. This does not necessarily mean that the honorand is no longer active.


 ENS CAUSA SUI ,,,,, existing because of oneself ,,,,, Or "being one's own cause". Traditionally, a being that owes its existence to no other being, hence God or a Supreme Being (cf. _Primum Mobile_).


 ENSE PETIT PLACIDAM SUB LIBERTATE QUIETEM ,,,,, by the sword she seeks a serene repose under liberty ,,,,, State motto of Massachusetts, adopted in 1775.


 ENTIA NON SUNT MULTIPLICANDA PRAETER NECESSITATEM ,,,,, entities must not be multiplied beyond necessity ,,,,, Occam's Razor or Law of Parsimony; that is, that arguments which do not introduce extraneous variables are to be preferred in logical argumentation.


 ENTITAS IPSA INVOLVIT APTITUDINEM AD EXTORQUENDUM CERTUM ASSENSUM ,,,,, reality involves a power to compel sure assent ,,,,, A phrase used in modern Western philosophy on the nature of truth.


 EO IPSO ,,,,, by that very (act) ,,,,, Technical term used in philosophy and the law. Similar to ipso facto. Example: "The fact that I am does not _eo ipso_ mean that I think." From Latin _eo ipso_, ablative form of _id ipsum_, "that (thing) itself".


 EO NOMINE ,,,,, by that name ,,,,, 


 EQUO NE CREDITE ,,,,, do not trust the horse ,,,,, Virgil, _Aeneid_, II. 48–49; a reference to the Trojan Horse


 ERGA OMNES ,,,,, in relation to everyone ,,,,, 


 ERGO ,,,,, therefore ,,,,, Denotes a logical conclusion (cf. _cogito ergo sum_).


 ERRARE HUMANUM EST ,,,,, to err is human ,,,,, Sometimes attributed to Seneca the Younger, but not attested: _Errare humanum est, perseverare autem diabolicum, et tertia non datur_ (To err is human; to persist [in committing such errors] is of the devil, and the third possibility is not given.) Several authors contemplated the idea before Seneca: Livy _Venia dignus error is humanus_ (_Storie_, VIII, 35) and Cicero: _is Cuiusvis errare: insipientis nullius nisi, in errore perseverare_ (Anyone can err, but only the fool persists in his fault) (_Philippicae_ XII, ii, 5). Cicero - well-versed in ancient Greek - may well have been alluding to Euripides' play _Hippolytus_ some four centuries earlier.^([22]) 300 years later Augustine of Hippo recycled the idea in his _Sermones_ (164, 14): _Humanum fuit errare, diabolicum est per animositatem in errore manere._^([23]) The phrase gained currency in English language after Alexander Pope's _An Essay on Criticism_ (1711): "To err is human, to forgive divine." (line 325).


 ERRATUM ,,,,, error ,,,,, Or "mistake". Lists of errors in a previous edition of a work are often marked with the plural, _errata_ ("errors").


 ERRANTIS VOLUNTAS NULLA EST ,,,,, the will of a mistaken party is void ,,,,, Roman legal principle formulated by Pomponius in the _Digest_ of the _Corpus Juris Civilis_, stating that legal actions undertaken by man under the influence of error are ineffective.


 ERUDITIO ET RELIGIO ,,,,, scholarship and duty ,,,,, Motto of Duke University


 ESSE EST PERCIPI ,,,,, to be is to be perceived ,,,,, George Berkeley's motto for his subjective idealist philosophical position that nothing exists independently of its perception by a mind except minds themselves.


 ESSE QUAM VIDERI ,,,,, to be, rather than to seem ,,,,, Truly being something, rather than merely seeming to be something. Motto of many institutions. From chapter 26 of Cicero's _De amicitia_ ('On Friendship'). Earlier than Cicero, the phrase had been used by Sallust in his _Bellum Catilinae_ (54.6), where he wrote that Cato _esse quam videri bonus malebat_ (he preferred to be good, rather than to seem so). Earlier still, Aeschylus used a similar phrase in _Seven Against Thebes_, line 592, _ou gar dokein aristos, all' enai thelei_ (he wishes not to seem the best, but to be the best); also motto of North Carolina and Ashville College, Cranbrook_School,_Sydney, Royal Holloway College and the Episcopal Academy.


 EST MODUS IN REBUS ,,,,, there is measure in things ,,,,, there is a middle ground in things, there is a middle way; from Horace's _Satires_ 1.1.106; see also: Golden mean (philosophy). According to Potempski & Galmarini (Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 9471–9489, 2009) the sentence should be translated as: "There is an optimal condition in all things" which in the original text is followed by the sentence: "There are therefore precise boundaries beyond which one cannot find the right thing" (sunt certi denique fines quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum).


 ESTO PERPETUA ,,,,, may it be perpetual ,,,,, Said of Venice by the Venetian historian Fra Paolo Sarpi shortly before his death. Also the state motto of Idaho, adopted in 1867, and of S. Thomas' College, Mount Lavinia, Sri Lanka. It is also used as the open motto of Sigma Phi Society, a collegiate Greek Letter Fraternity.


 ESTO QUOD ES ,,,,, be what you are ,,,,, Motto of Wells Cathedral School.


 ET ADHUC SUB IUDICE LIS EST ,,,,, it is still before the court ,,,,, Horace, _Ars Poetica_ (_The Art of Poetry_) 1.78.


 ET ALIBI (et al.) ,,,,, and elsewhere ,,,,, A less common variant on _et cetera_ used at the end of a list of locations to denote unlisted places.


 ET ALII (et al.) ,,,,, and others ,,,,, Used similarly to _et cetera_ ("and the rest"), to stand for a list of names. _Alii_ is masculine, so it can be used for men, or groups of men and women; the feminine, _et aliae_, is appropriate when the "others" are all female; but as with many loanwords, interlingual use (such as in reference lists) is often invariable. _Et alia_ is neuter plural and thus in Latin text is properly used only for inanimate, genderless objects, but some use it as a gender-neutral alternative.^([24]) APA style uses et al. (normal font)^([25]) if the work cited was written by more than six authors; MLA style uses et al. for more than three authors; AMA style lists all authors if ≤6, and 3 + et al if >6. AMA style forgoes the period (because it forgoes the period on abbreviations generally) and it forgoes the italic (as it does with other loanwords naturalized into scientific English); many journals that follow AMA style do likewise.


 ET CETERA (etc. (US English); etc (UK English)) _or_ (&C. (US); &C (UK)) ,,,,, And the rest ,,,,, In modern usage, used to mean "and so on" or "and more".


 ET FACTA EST LUX ,,,,, And light came to be _or_ was made ,,,,, From Genesis 1:3 "and there was light". Motto of Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia.


 ’’’Et facere et pati fortia Romanum est’’’ ,,,,, Acting and suffering bravely is the attribute of a Roman ,,,,, The words of Gaius Mucius Scaevola when taken prisoner by Lars Porsena


 ET HOC GENUS OMNE ,,,,, And all that sort of thing ,,,,, Abbreviated to E.H.G.O. or EHGO


 ET IN ARCADIA EGO ,,,,, and in Arcadia [am] I ,,,,, In other words, "I, too, am in Arcadia". See _memento mori_.


 ET LUX IN TENEBRIS LUCET ,,,,, And light shines in the darkness ,,,,, See also _Lux in Tenebris_; motto for the Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú.


 ET NUNC REGES INTELLIGITE ERUDIMINI QUI JUDICATIS TERRAM ,,,,, And now, O ye kings, understand: receive instruction, you that judge the earth. ,,,,, From the Book of Psalms, II.x. (Vulgate), 2.10 (Douay-Rheims).


 ET SEQUENTES (ET SEQ.) ,,,,, and the following (masc./fem. plural) ,,,,, Also _et sequentia_ ('and the following things': neut.), abbreviations: _et seqq._, _et seq._, or _sqq._ Commonly used in legal citations to refer to statutes spread over several sequential sections of a code of statutes (e.g. National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. § 159 _et seq._; New Jersey Prevention of Domestic Violence Act, N.J. Stat. Ann. § 2C:25-17 _et seq._).


 ET CUM SPIRITU TUO ,,,,, And with your spirit ,,,,, A phrase from the Sursum corda of Christian liturgy.


 ET SUPPOSITIO NIL PONIT IN ESSE ,,,,, and a supposition puts nothing in being ,,,,, More typically translated as "Sayin' it don't make it so".


 ET TU, BRUTE? ,,,,, And you, Brutus? ,,,,, Also "Even you, Brutus?" or "You too, Brutus?" Used to indicate a betrayal by someone close. From Shakespeare's _Julius Caesar_, based on the traditional dying words of Julius Caesar. However, these were almost certainly not Caesar's true last words; Plutarch quotes Caesar as saying, in Greek, the language of Rome's elite at the time, καὶ σὺ τέκνον; (_Kaì sù téknon?_), in English "You too, (my) child?", quoting from Menander.


 ET UXOR (ET UX.) ,,,,, and wife ,,,,, A legal term.


 ET VIR ,,,,, and husband ,,,,, A legal term.


 ETIAM SI OMNES, EGO NON ,,,,, Even if all others... I will never ,,,,, Peter to Jesus Christ (from Vulgate Matthew 26:33; New King James Version: Matthew 26:33).


 ETSI DEUS NON DARETUR ,,,,, even if God were not a given ,,,,, Sentence synthesizing a famous concept of Grotius (1625).


 EX ABUNDANTI CAUTELA ,,,,, out of an abundance of caution ,,,,, In law, describes someone taking precautions against a very remote contingency. "One might wear a belt in addition to braces _ex abundanti cautela_".^([26]) In banking, a loan in which the collateral is more than the loan itself. Also the basis for the term "an abundance of caution" employed by United States President Barack Obama to explain why his oath of office had to be re-administered by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court John Roberts and again in reference to terrorist threats.


 EX ABUNDANTIA ENIM CORDIS OS LOQUITUR ,,,,, For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. ,,,,, From the Gospel according to St. Matthew, XII.xxxiv (Vulgate), 12.34 (Douay-Rheims) and the Gospel according to St. Luke, VI.xlv (Vulgate), 6.45 (Douay-Rheims). Sometimes rendered without _enim_ ('for').


 EX AEQUO ,,,,, from the equal ,,,,, "On equal footing", i.e., "in a tie". Used for those two (seldom more) participants of a competition, that showed exactly the same performance.


 EX AFRICA SEMPER ALIQUID NOVI ,,,,, "(There's) always something new (coming) out of Africa" ,,,,, Pliny the Elder, _Naturalis Historia_ 8.42 (_unde etiam vulgare Graeciae dictum semper aliquid novi Africam adferre_^([27])), a translation of the Greek «Ἀεὶ Λιβύη φέρει τι καινόν».


 EX AMICITIA PAX ,,,,, Peace from friendship ,,,,, Often seen on internal diplomatic event invitations. Motto sometimes found on flags and mission plaques Diplomatic corps


 EX ANIMO ,,,,, from the soul ,,,,, Thus, "sincerely".


 EX ANTE ,,,,, from before ,,,,, "Beforehand", "before the event". Based on prior assumptions. A forecast.


 EX ASTRIS SCIENTIA ,,,,, From the Stars, Knowledge ,,,,, The motto of the fictional Starfleet Academy on _Star Trek_. Adapted from _ex luna scientia_, which in turn was modeled after _ex scientia tridens_.


 EX CATHEDRA ,,,,, from the chair ,,,,, A phrase applied to the declarations or promulgations of the Pope when, in communion with the college of cardinals, preserved from the possibility of error by the action of the Holy Spirit (see Papal infallibility), he solemnly declares or promulgates ("from the chair" that was the ancient symbol of the teacher and of the governor, in this case of the church) a dogmatic teaching on faith or morals as being contained in divine revelation, or at least being intimately connected to divine revelation. Used, by extension, of anyone who is perceived as speaking as though with supreme authority.


 EX CULTU ROBUR ,,,,, from culture [comes] strength ,,,,, The motto of Cranleigh School, Surrey.


 EX DEO ,,,,, from God ,,,,, 


 EX DOLO MALO ,,,,, from fraud ,,,,, "From harmful deceit"; _dolus malus_ is the Latin legal term for "fraud". The full legal phrase is _ex dolo malo non oritur actio_ ("an action does not arise from fraud"). When an action has its origin in fraud or deceit, it cannot be supported; thus, a court of law will not assist a man who bases his course of action on an immoral or illegal act.


 EX FACIE ,,,,, from the face ,,,,, Idiomatically rendered "on the face of it". A legal term typically used to note that a document's explicit terms are defective without further investigation.


 EX FIDE FIDUCIA ,,,,, from faith [comes] confidence ,,,,, Motto of St George's College, Harare and Hartmann House Preparatory School


 EX FIDE FORTIS ,,,,, from faith [comes] strength ,,,,, Motto of Loyola School (New York City)


 EX GLANDE QUERCUS ,,,,, from the acorn the oak ,,,,, Motto of the Municipal Borough of Southgate, London


 EX GRATIA ,,,,, from kindness ,,,,, More literally "from grace". Refers to someone voluntarily performing an act purely out of kindness, as opposed to for personal gain or from being forced to do it. In law, an _ex gratia_ payment is one made without recognizing any liability or legal obligation.


 EX HYPOTHESI ,,,,, from the hypothesis ,,,,, Thus, "by hypothesis".


 EX INFRA (e.i.) cf. ex supra ,,,,, "from below" ,,,,, Recent academic notation for "from below in this writing"


 EX JUVANTIBUS ,,,,, from that which helps ,,,,, The medical pitfall in which response to a therapeutic regimen substitutes proper diagnosis.


 EX LEGE ,,,,, from the law ,,,,, 


 EX LIBRIS ,,,,, from the books ,,,,, Precedes a person's name, with the meaning of "from the library of..."; also a bookplate.


 EX LUNA SCIENTIA ,,,,, from the moon, knowledge ,,,,, The motto of the Apollo 13 moon mission, derived from _ex scientia tridens_, the motto of Jim Lovell's Alma Mater, the United States Naval Academy.


 EX MALO BONUM ,,,,, good out of evil ,,,,, From St. Augustine's "Sermon LXI" where he contradicts Seneca's dictum in Epistulae 87:22: _bonum ex malo non fit_ (good does not come from evil). Also the alias of the Anberlin song, "Miserabile Visu" from their album _New Surrender_.


 EX MEA SENTENTIA ,,,,, in my opinion ,,,,, 


 EX MERO MOTU ,,,,, out of mere impulse, or of one's own accord. ,,,,, 


 EX NIHILO NIHIL FIT ,,,,, nothing comes from nothing ,,,,, From Lucretius, and said earlier by Empedocles. Its original meaning is "work is required to succeed", but its modern meaning is a more general "everything has its origins in something" (cf. causality). It is commonly applied to the conservation laws in philosophy and modern science. _Ex nihilo_ often used in conjunction with the term _creation_, as in _creatio ex nihilo_, meaning "creation out of nothing". It is often used in philosophy or theology in connection with the proposition that God created the universe from nothing. It is also mentioned in the final ad-lib of the Monty Python song Always Look on the Bright Side of Life.


 EX NOVO ,,,,, Anew ,,,,, Said of something that has been built from scratch. (Cf. _de novo_)


 EX OBLIVIONE ,,,,, from oblivion ,,,,, The title of a short story by H. P. Lovecraft.


 EX OFFICIO ,,,,, from the office ,,,,, By virtue of office or position; "by right of office". Often used when someone holds one position by virtue of holding another: for example, the President of France is an _ex officio_ Co-Prince of Andorra. A common misconception is that all ex officio members of a committee or congress may not vote – this may be the case, but it is not guaranteed by that title. In legal terms, ex officio refers to an administrative or judicial office taking action of its own accord, for example to invalidate a patent or prosecute copyright infringers.


 EX OPERE OPERANTIS ,,,,, from the work of the one working ,,,,, A theological phrase contrasted with ex opere operato, referring to the notion that the validity or promised benefit of a sacrament depends on the person administering it.


 EX OPERE OPERATO ,,,,, from the work worked ,,,,, A theological phrase meaning that the act of receiving a sacrament actually confers the promised benefit, such as a baptism actually and literally cleansing one's sins. The Catholic Church affirms that the source of grace is God, not just the actions or disposition of the minister or the recipient of the sacrament.


 EX ORIENTE LUX ,,,,, light from the east ,,,,, Originally refers to the sun rising in the east, but alludes to culture coming from the Eastern world. Motto of several institutions.


 EX PARTE ,,,,, from a part ,,,,, A legal term that means "by one party" or "for one party". Thus, on behalf of one side or party only.


 EX PEDE HERCULEM ,,,,, from his foot, so Hercules ,,,,, From the measure of Hercules' foot you shall know his size; from a part, the whole.


 EX POST ,,,,, from after ,,,,, "Afterward", "after the event". Based on knowledge of the past. Measure of past performance.


 EX POST FACTO ,,,,, from a thing done afterward ,,,,, Said of a law with retroactive effect.


 EX PROFESSO ,,,,, from one declaring [an art or science] ,,,,, Or 'with due competence'. Said of the person who perfectly knows his art or science. Also used to mean "expressly".^([28])


 EX REL. or EX RELATIO ,,,,, [arising] out of the relation/narration [of the relator] ,,,,, The term is a legal phrase; the legal citation guide called the _Bluebook_ describes _ex rel._ as a "procedural phrase" and requires using it to abbreviate "on the relation of," "for the use of," "on behalf of," and similar expressions. An example of use is in court case titles such as _Universal Health Services, Inc. v. United States ex rel. Escobar_


 EX SCIENTIA TRIDENS ,,,,, from knowledge, sea power. ,,,,, The United States Naval Academy motto. Refers to knowledge bringing men power over the sea comparable to that of the trident-bearing Greek god Poseidon.


 EX SCIENTIA VERA ,,,,, from knowledge, truth ,,,,, The motto of the College of Graduate Studies at Middle Tennessee State University.


 EX SILENTIO ,,,,, from silence ,,,,, In general, the claim that the absence of something demonstrates the proof of a proposition. An _argumentum ex silentio_ ("argument from silence") is an argument based on the assumption that someone's silence on a matter suggests ("proves" when a logical fallacy) that person's ignorance of the matter or their inability to counterargue validly.


 EX SITU ,,,,, out of position ,,,,, opposite of "in situ"


 EX SUPRA (e.s.) cf. ex infra ,,,,, "from above" ,,,,, Recent academic notation for "from above in this writing".


 EX TEMPORE ,,,,, from [this moment of] time ,,,,, "This instant", "right away" or "immediately". Also written _extempore_.


 EX TURPI CAUSA NON ORITUR ACTIO ,,,,, From a dishonorable cause an action does not arise ,,,,, A legal doctrine which states that a claimant will be unable to pursue a cause of action, if it arises in connection with his own illegal act. Particularly relevant in the law of contract, tort and trusts.


 EX UMBRA IN SOLEM ,,,,, from the shadow into the light ,,,,, Motto of Federico Santa María Technical University.


 EX UNDIS ,,,,, from the waves [of the sea] ,,,,, motto in the coat of arms of Eemsmond


 EX UNITATE VIRES ,,,,, union is strength, or unity is strength ,,,,, motto of South Africa.


 EX VI TERMINI ,,,,, from the force of the term ,,,,, Thus, "by definition".


 EX VITA DISCEDO, TANQUAM EX HOSPITIO, NON TANQUAM EX DOMO ,,,,, I depart from life as from an inn, not as from home ,,,,, Cicero, _Cato Maior de Senectute_ (_On Old Age_) 23


 EX VIVO ,,,,, out of or from life ,,,,, Used in reference to the study or assay of living tissue in an artificial environment outside the living organism.


 EX VOTO ,,,,, from the vow ,,,,, Thus, in accordance with a promise. An _ex voto_ is also an offering made in fulfillment of a vow.


 EX VULGUS SCIENTIA ,,,,, from crowd, knowledge ,,,,, used to describe social computing, in _The Wisdom of Crowds_ and discourse referring to it.


 EXCELSIOR ,,,,, higher ,,,,, "Ever upward!" The state motto of New York. Also a catchphrase used by Marvel Comics head Stan Lee.


 EXCEPTIO FIRMAT (or _probat_) REGULAM IN CASIBUS NON EXCEPTIS ,,,,, The exception confirms the rule in cases which are not excepted ,,,,, A juridical principle which means that the statement of a rule's exception (e.g., "no parking on Sundays") implicitly confirms the rule (i.e., that parking is allowed Monday through Saturday). Often mistranslated as "the exception that proves the rule".


 EXCUSATIO NON PETITA ACCUSATIO MANIFESTA ,,,,, an excuse that has not been sought [is] an obvious accusation ,,,,, More loosely, "he who excuses himself, accuses himself"—an unprovoked excuse is a sign of guilt. In French, _qui s'excuse, s'accuse_.


 EXEAT ,,,,, s/he may go out ,,,,, A formal leave of absence.


 EXEGI MONUMENTUM AERE PERENNIUS ,,,,, I have reared a monument more enduring than bronze ,,,,, Horace, _Carmina_ III:XXX:I


 EXEMPLI GRATIA (E.G.) ,,,,, for the sake of example, for example ,,,,, _Exempli gratiā_, 'for example', is usually abbreviated "e.g." (less commonly, _ex. gr._). The abbreviation is often read aloud in English as "for example" (see citation signal and compare how the ampersand is read as "and"), though it is also often applied as a substitute for similar phrases, like "such as" and "including". The abbreviation may be followed by a comma or not, depending on the style of the writer. The comma is more apt to be dropped before a simple expression with no punctuation of its own, and is more likely to be retained for multiple items.^([29]) A colon can also be used,^([30]) especially before a long or complex list. _E.g._ is often confused with _i.e._ (_id est_, 'that is', 'in other words').^([31]) Some writing styles give such abbreviations without punctuation, as _ie_ and _eg_.^([a])


 EXERCITUS SINE DUCE CORPUS EST SINE SPIRITU ,,,,, an army without a leader is a body without a spirit ,,,,, On a plaque at the former military staff building of the Swedish Armed Forces.


 EXEUNT ,,,,, they leave ,,,,, Third-person plural present active indicative of the Latin verb _exire_; also seen in _exeunt omnes_, "all leave"; singular: _exit_.


 EXPERIENTIA DOCET ,,,,, experience teaches ,,,,, This term has been used in dermatopathology to express that there is no substitute for experience in dealing with all the numerous variations that may occur with skin conditions.^([47]) The term has also been used in gastroenterology.^([48]) It is also the motto of San Francisco State University.


 EXPERIMENTUM CRUCIS ,,,,, experiment of the cross ,,,,, Or "crucial experiment". A decisive test of a scientific theory.


 EXPERTO CREDE ,,,,, trust the expert ,,,,, Literally "believe one who has had experience". An author's aside to the reader.


 EXPRESSIO UNIUS EST EXCLUSIO ALTERIUS ,,,,, the expression of the one is the exclusion of the other ,,,,, "Mentioning one thing may exclude another thing". A principle of legal statutory interpretation: the explicit presence of a thing implies intention to exclude others; e.g., a reference in the Poor Relief Act 1601 to "lands, houses, tithes and coal mines" was held to exclude mines other than coal mines. Sometimes expressed as _expressum facit cessare tacitum_ (broadly, "the expression of one thing excludes the implication of something else").


 EXTRA DOMUM ,,,,, [placed] outside of the house ,,,,, Refers to a possible result of Catholic ecclesiastical legal proceedings when the culprit is removed from being part of a group like a monastery.


 EXTRA ECCLESIAM NULLA SALUS ,,,,, outside the Church [there is] no salvation ,,,,, This expression comes from the _Epistle to Jubaianus_, paragraph 21, written by Saint Cyprian of Carthage, a bishop of the third century. It is often used to summarise the doctrine that the Catholic Church is absolutely necessary for salvation.


 EXTRA OMNES ,,,,, outside, all [of you] ,,,,, It is issued by the Master of the Papal Liturgical Celebrations before a session of the Papal conclave which will elect a new Pope. When spoken, all those who are not Cardinals, or those otherwise mandated to be present at the Conclave, must leave the Sistine Chapel.


 EXTRA TERRITORIUM JUS DICENTI IMPUNE NON PARETUR ,,,,, he who administers justice outside of his territory is disobeyed with impunity ,,,,, Refers to extraterritorial jurisdiction. Often cited in law of the sea cases on the high seas.


 FABER EST SUAE QUISQUE FORTUNAE ,,,,, every man is the artisan of his own fortune ,,,,, Appius Claudius Caecus; motto of Fort Street High School in Petersham, Sydney, Australia


 FAC ET SPERA ,,,,, do and hope ,,,,, motto of Clan Matheson


 FAC FORTIA ET PATERE ,,,,, do brave deeds and endure ,,,,, motto of Prince Alfred College in Adelaide, Australia


 FAC SIMILE ,,,,, make a similar thing ,,,,, origin of the word _facsimile_, and, through it, of _fax_


 FACIAM EOS IN GENTEM UNUM ,,,,, I will make them into one nation ,,,,, appeared on British coinage following the Union of the Crowns


 FACIAM QUODLIBET QUOD NECESSE EST ,,,,, I'll do whatever it takes ,,,,, 


 FACIAM UT MEI MEMINERIS ,,,,, I'll make you remember me ,,,,, from Plautus, _Persa_ IV.3–24; used by Russian hooligans as tattoo inscription


 FACILE PRINCEPS ,,,,, easily the first ,,,,, said of the acknowledged leader in some field, especially in the arts and humanities


 FACILIUS EST MULTA FACERE QUAM DIU ,,,,, It is easier to do many things, than one thing consecutively ,,,,, Quintilian, _Institutio Oratoria_ 1/12:7


 FACIO LIBEROS EX LIBERIS LIBRIS LIBRAQUE ,,,,, "I make free adults out of children by means of books and a balance." ,,,,, motto of St. John's College in Annapolis, Maryland, and Santa Fe, New Mexico


 FACTA, NON VERBA ,,,,, deeds, not words ,,,,, Frequently used as motto


 FACTUM FIERI INFECTUM NON POTEST ,,,,, It is impossible for a deed to be undone ,,,,, Terence, _Phormio_ 5/8:45


 FALSUS IN UNO, FALSUS IN OMNIBUS ,,,,, false in one, false in all ,,,,, A Roman legal principle indicating that a witness who willfully falsifies one matter is not credible on any matter. The underlying motive for attorneys to impeach opposing witnesses in court: the principle discredits the rest of their testimony if it is without corroboration.


 FAMILIA SUPRA OMNIA ,,,,, family over everything ,,,,, frequently used as a family motto


 FAS EST ET AB HOSTE DOCERI ,,,,, It is lawful to be taught even by an enemy ,,,,, Ovid, _Metamorphoses_ 4:428


 FECI QUOD POTUI, FACIANT MELIORA POTENTES ,,,,, I have done what I could; let those who can do better. ,,,,, Slight variant ("quod potui feci") found in James Boswell's _An Account of Corsica_, there described as "a simple beautiful inscription on the front of Palazzo Tolomei at Siena".^([49]) Later, found in Henry Baerlein's introduction to his translation of _The Diwan of Abul ʿAla_ by Abul ʿAla Al-Maʿarri (973–1057);^([50]) also in Anton Chekhov's _Three Sisters_, act 1. Also in Alfonso Moreno Espinosa, _Compendio de Historia Universal_, 5. ed. (Cádiz 1888).


 NN FECIT ,,,,, NN made (this) ,,,,, a formula used traditionally in the author's signature by painters, sculptors, artisans, scribes etc.; compare pinxit


 FECISTI PATRIAM DIVERSIS DE GENTIBUS UNAM ,,,,, "From differing peoples you have made one native land" ,,,,, Verse 63 from the poem _De reditu suo_ by Rutilius Claudius Namatianus praising emperor Augustus.^([51])


 FELICIOR AUGUSTO, MELIOR TRAIANO ,,,,, "be more fortunate than Augustus and better than Trajan" ,,,,, ritual acclamation delivered to late Roman emperors


 FELICITAS, INTEGRITAS ET SAPIENTIA ,,,,, Happiness, Integrity and Knowledge ,,,,, The motto of Oakland Colegio Campestre school through which Colombia participates of NASA Educational Programs


 FELIX CULPA ,,,,, fortunate fault ,,,,, from the "Exsultet" of the Catholic liturgy for the Easter Vigil


 FELIX QUI POTUIT RERUM COGNOSCERE CAUSAS ,,,,, happy is he who can ascertain the causes of things ,,,,, Virgil. "Rerum cognoscere causas" is the motto of the London School of Economics, University of Sheffield, and University of Guelph.


 FELO DE SE ,,,,, felon from himself ,,,,, archaic legal term for one who commits suicide, referring to early English common law punishments, such as land seizure, inflicted on those who killed themselves


 FERE LIBENTER HOMINES ID QUOD VOLUNT CREDUNT ,,,,, men generally believe what they want to ,,,,, People's beliefs are shaped largely by their desires. Julius Caesar, _The Gallic War_ 3.18


 FESTINA LENTE ,,,,, hurry slowly ,,,,, An oxymoronic motto of Augustus. It encourages proceeding quickly, but calmly and cautiously. Equivalent to "more haste, less speed". Motto of the Madeira School, McLean, Virginia and Berkhamsted School, Berkhamsted, England, United Kingdom


 FESTINARE NOCET, NOCET ET CUNCTATIO SAEPE; TEMPORE QUAEQUE SUO QUI FACIT, ILLE SAPIT. ,,,,, it is bad to hurry, and delay is often as bad; the wise person is the one who does everything in its proper time. ,,,,, Ovid^([52])


 FIAT IUSTITIA ET PEREAT MUNDUS ,,,,, let justice be done, though the world shall perish ,,,,, motto of Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor


 FIAT JUSTITIA RUAT CAELUM ,,,,, let justice be done should the sky fall ,,,,, attributed to Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus


 FIAT LUX ,,,,, let there be light ,,,,, from the Genesis, "_dixitque Deus fiat lux et facta est lux_" ("and God said, 'Let light be made', and light was made."); frequently used as the motto of schools.


 FIAT PANIS ,,,,, let there be bread ,,,,, Motto of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)


 FIAT VOLUNTAS DEI ,,,,, May God's will be done ,,,,, motto of Robert May's School; see the next phrase below


 FIAT VOLUNTAS TUA ,,,,, Thy will be done ,,,,, motto of Archbishop Richard Smith of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Edmonton; quotation of the third petition of the Pater Noster (Our Father) prayer dictated by Jesus Christ


 FICTA VOLUPTATIS CAUSA SINT PROXIMA VERIS ,,,,, fictions meant to please should approximate the truth ,,,,, Horace, _Ars Poetica_ (338); advice presumably discounted by the magical realists


 FIDEI DEFENSOR (FID DEF) _or_ (FD) ,,,,, Defender of the Faith ,,,,, A title given to King Henry VIII of England by Pope Leo X on 17 October 1521, before Henry became a heresiarch. British monarchs continue to use the title, which is still inscribed on all British coins, and usually abbreviated.


 FIDEM SCIT ,,,,, he knows the faith ,,,,, sometimes mistranslated to "keep the faith" when used in contemporary English writings of all kinds to convey a light-hearted wish for the reader's well-being


 FIDES QUA CREDITUR ,,,,, the faith by which it is believed ,,,,, Roman Catholic theological term for the personal faith that apprehends what is believed, contrasted with _fides QUAE creditur_, which is what is believed; see next phrase below


 FIDES QUAE CREDITUR ,,,,, the faith which is believed ,,,,, Roman Catholic theological term for the content and truths of the Faith or "the deposit of the Faith", contrasted with _fides QUA creditur_, which is the personal faith by which the Faith is believed; see previous phrase


 FIDES QUAERENS INTELLECTUM ,,,,, faith seeking understanding ,,,,, motto of St. Anselm; _Proslogion_


 FIDUS ACHATES ,,,,, faithful Achates ,,,,, refers to a faithful friend; from the name of Aeneas's faithful companion in Virgil's _Aeneid_


 FILIAE NOSTRAE SICUT ANGULI INCISI SIMILITUDINE TEMPLI ,,,,, may our daughters be as polished as the corners of the temple ,,,,, motto of Francis Holland School


 FINIS CORONAT OPUS ,,,,, the end crowns the work ,,,,, A major part of a work is properly finishing it. Motto of St. Mary's Catholic High School in Dubai, United Arab Emirates; on the Coat of Arms of Seychelles; and of the Amin Investment Bank


 FINIS VITAE SED NON AMORIS ,,,,, the end of life, but not of love ,,,,, unknown


 FLAGELLUM DEI ,,,,, the scourge of God ,,,,, title for Attila the Hun, the ruthless invader of the Western Roman Empire


 FLATUS VOCIS ,,,,, [a or the] breath of voice ,,,,, a mere name, word, or sound without a corresponding objective reality; expression used by the nominalists of universals and traditionally attributed to the medieval philosopher Roscelin of Compiègne


 FLECTERE SI NEQUEO SUPEROS, ACHERONTA MOVEBO ,,,,, if I can not reach Heaven I will raise Hell ,,,,, Virgil, _Aeneid_, Book VII.312


 FLOREAT ETONA ,,,,, may Eton flourish ,,,,, Motto of Eton College, England, United Kingdom


 FLOREAT NOSTRA SCHOLA ,,,,, may our school flourish ,,,,, a common scholastic motto


 FLORUIT (fl.) ,,,,, one flourished ,,,,, indicates the period when a historic person was most active or was accomplishing that for which he is famous; may be used as a substitute when the dates of his birth and/or death are unknown.


 FLUCTUAT NEC MERGITUR ,,,,, she wavers and is not immersed ,,,,, Motto of the City of Paris, France


 FONS ET ORIGO ,,,,, the spring and source ,,,,, also: "the fountainhead and beginning"


 FONS SAPIENTIAE, VERBUM DEI ,,,,, the fount of knowledge is the word of God ,,,,, motto of Bishop Blanchet High School


 FONS VITAE CARITAS ,,,,, love is the fountain of life ,,,,, motto of Chisipite Senior School and Chisipite Junior School


 FORMOSAM RESONARE DOCES AMARYLLIDA SILVAS ,,,,, teach the woods to re-echo "fair Amaryllis" ,,,,, Virgil, _Eclogues_, 1:5


 FORSAN ET HAEC OLIM MEMINISSE IUVABIT ,,,,, perhaps even these things will be good to remember one day ,,,,, Virgil, _Aeneid_, Book 1, Line 203


 FORTES FORTUNA ADIUVAT ,,,,, Fortune favours the bold ,,,,, The motto of the United States Marine Corps 3rd Marine Regiment


 FORTES FORTUNA JUVAT ,,,,, Fortune favours the bold ,,,,, The motto of the Jutland Dragoon Regiment of Denmark


 FORTES IN FIDE ,,,,, strong in faith ,,,,, a common motto


 FORTIS CADERE, CEDERE NON POTEST ,,,,, the brave may fall, but can not yield ,,,,, motto on the Coat of Arms of the Fahnestock Family and of the Palmetto Guard of Charleston, South Carolina


 FORTIS EST VERITAS ,,,,, truth is strong ,,,,, motto on the Coat of Arms of Oxford, England, United Kingdom


 FORTIS ET LIBER ,,,,, strong and free ,,,,, motto of Alberta, Canada


 FORTIS IN ARDUIS ,,,,, strong in difficulties ,,,,, motto of the Municipal Borough of Middleton, from the Earl of Middleton


 FORTITER ET FIDELITER ,,,,, bravely and faithfully ,,,,, a common motto


 FORTITER IN RE, SUAVITER IN MODO ,,,,, resolute in execution, gentle in manner ,,,,, a common motto


 FORTUNAE MEAE, MULTORUM FABER ,,,,, artisan of my fate and that of several others ,,,,, motto of Gatineau


 FRAUS OMNIA VITIAT ,,,,, a legal principle: the occurrence or taint of fraud in a (legal) transaction entirely invalidates it ,,,,, 


 FUI QUOD ES, ERIS QUOD SUM ,,,,, I once was what you are, you will be what I am ,,,,, An epitaph that reminds the reader of the inevitability of death, as if to state: "Once I was alive like you are, and you will be dead as I am now." It was carved on the gravestones of some Roman military officers.


 FUMUS BONI IURIS ,,,,, presumption of sufficient legal basis ,,,,, a legal principle


 FUNDAMENTA INCONCUSSA ,,,,, unshakable foundation ,,,,, 


 GAUDIA CERTAMINIS ,,,,, the joys of battle ,,,,, according to Cassiodorus, an expression used by Attila in addressing his troops prior to the 451 Battle of Châlons


 GAUDEAMUS HODIE ,,,,, let us rejoice today ,,,,, 


 GAUDEAMUS IGITUR ,,,,, therefore let us rejoice ,,,,, First words of an academic anthem used, among other places, in _The Student Prince_.


 GAUDETE IN DOMINO ,,,,, rejoice in the Lord ,,,,, Motto of Bishop Allen Academy


 GAUDIUM IN VERITATE ,,,,, joy in truth ,,,,, Motto of Campion School


 GENERALIA SPECIALIBUS NON DEROGANT ,,,,, general provisions enacted in later legislation do not detract from specific provisions enacted in earlier legislation ,,,,, A principle of statutory interpretation: If a matter falls under a specific provision in a statute enacted before a general provision enacted in a later statute, it is to be presumed that the legislature did not intend that the earlier specific provision be repealed, and the matter is governed by the earlier specific provision, not the more recent general one.


 GENIUS LOCI ,,,,, spirit of place ,,,,, The unique, distinctive aspects or atmosphere of a place, such as those celebrated in art, stories, folk tales, and festivals. Originally, the _genius loci_ was literally the protective spirit of a place, a creature usually depicted as a snake.


 GENERATIM DISCITE CULTUS ,,,,, Learn each field of study according to its kind. (Virgil, Georgics II.) ,,,,, Motto of the University of Bath.


 GENS UNA SUMUS ,,,,, we are one people ,,,,, Motto of FIDE. Can be traced back to Claudian's poem _De consulatu Stilichonis_.


 GESTA NON VERBA ,,,,, deeds, not words ,,,,, Motto of James Ruse Agricultural High School.


 GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO ,,,,, Glory to God in the Highest ,,,,, Often translated "Glory to God on High". The title and beginning of an ancient Roman Catholic doxology, the Greater Doxology. See also _ad maiorem Dei gloriam_.


 GLORIA INVIDIAM VICISTI ,,,,, By your fame you have conquered envy ,,,,, Sallust, _Bellum Jugurthum_ ("_Jugurthine War_") 10:2.


 GLORIA FILIORUM PATRES ,,,,, The glory of sons is their fathers (Proverbs17:6) ,,,,, Motto of Eltham College


 GLORIA PATRI ,,,,, Glory to the Father ,,,,, The beginning of the Lesser Doxology.


 GLORIOSUS ET LIBER ,,,,, glorious and free ,,,,, Motto of Manitoba


 GRADATIM FEROCITER ,,,,, by degrees, ferociously ,,,,, Motto of private spaceflight company Blue Origin, which officially treats "Step by step, ferociously" as the English translation


 GRADIBUS ASCENDIMUS ,,,,, ascending by degrees ,,,,, Motto of Grey College, Durham


 GRAECIA CAPTA FERUM VICTOREM CEPIT ,,,,, Conquered Greece in turn defeated its savage conqueror ,,,,, Horace _Epistles_ 2.1


 GRAECUM EST; NON LEGITUR ,,,,, It is Greek (and therefore) it cannot be read. ,,,,, Most commonly from Shakespeare's _Julius Caesar_ where Casca couldn't explain to Cassius what Cicero was saying because he was speaking Greek. The more common colloquialism would be: It's all Greek to me.


 GRANDESCUNT AUCTA LABORE ,,,,, By hard work, all things increase and grow ,,,,, Motto of McGill University


 GRATIA ET SCIENTIA ,,,,, grace and learning ,,,,, Motto of Arundel School


 GRATIAE VERITAS NATURAE ,,,,, Truth through mercy and nature ,,,,, Motto of Uppsala University


 GRAVIORA MANENT ,,,,, heavier things remain ,,,,, Virgil _Aeneid_ 6:84; more severe things await, the worst is yet to come


 GRAVIS DULCIS IMMUTABILIS ,,,,, serious sweet immutable ,,,,, Title of a poem by James Elroy Flecker ^([53])


 GUTTA CAVAT LAPIDEM [NON VI SED SAEPE CADENDO] ,,,,, a water drop hollows a stone [not by force, but by falling often] ,,,,, main phrase is from Ovid, _Epistulae ex Ponto_ IV, 10, 5.;^([54]) expanded in the Middle Ages


 HABEAS CORPUS ,,,,, You should have the body ,,,,, A legal term from the 14th century or earlier. Refers to a number of legal writs to bring a person before a court or judge, most commonly _habeas corpus ad subiciendum_ (you may have the body to bring up). Commonly used as the general term for a prisoner's legal right to challenge the legality of their detention. (_Corpus_ here is used in a similar sense to _corpus delicti_, referring to the substance of the reason for detention rather than a physical human body.) 

 HABEMUS PAPAM ,,,,, we have a pope ,,,,, Used after a Catholic Church papal election to announce publicly a successful ballot to elect a new pope. 

 HABENT SUA FATA LIBELLI ,,,,, Books have their destiny [according to the capabilities of the reader] ,,,,, Terentianus Maurus, _De Litteris, De Syllabis, De Metris_, 1:1286. 

 HAC LEGE ,,,,, with this law ,,,,, 

 HAEC OLIM MEMINISSE IUVABIT ,,,,, one day, this will be pleasing to remember ,,,,, Commonly rendered in English as "One day, we'll look back on this and smile". From Virgil's _Aeneid_ 1.203. Also, motto of Handsworth Grammar School, and the Jefferson Society. 

 HAEC ORNAMENTA MEA [SUNT] ,,,,, "These are my ornaments" or "These are my jewels" ,,,,, Attributed to Cornelia Africana (talking about her children) by Valerius Maximus in _Factorum ac dictorum memorabilium libri IX_, IV, 4, _incipit_.^([55][56]) 

 HANNIBAL AD PORTAS ,,,,, Hannibal at the gates ,,,,, Found in Cicero's first _Philippic_ and in Livy's _Ab urbe condita_ Hannibal was a fierce enemy of Rome who almost brought them to defeat. Sometimes rendered "Hannibal _ante_ portas", with verisimilar meaning: "Hannibal _before_ the gates" 

 HAUD IGNOTA LOQUOR ,,,,, I speak not of unknown things ,,,,, Thus, "I say no things that are unknown". From Virgil's _Aeneid_, 2.91. 

 HEI MIHI! QUOD NULLIS AMOR EST MEDICABILIS HERBIS. ,,,,, Oh me! love can not be cured by herbs ,,,,, From Ovid's Metamorphoses ("Transformations"), I, 523. 

 HIC ABUNDANT LEONES ,,,,, here lions abound ,,,,, Written on uncharted territories of old maps; see also: here be dragons. 

 HIC ET NUNC ,,,,, here and now ,,,,, The imperative motto for the satisfaction of desire. "I need it, Here and Now" 

 HIC JACET (HJ) ,,,,, here lies ,,,,, Also rendered _hic iacet_. Written on gravestones or tombs, preceding the name of the deceased. Equivalent to _hic sepultus_ (here is buried), and sometimes combined into _hic jacet sepultus_ (HJS), "here lies buried". 

 HIC LOCUS EST UBI MORS GAUDET SUCCURRERE VITAE ,,,,, This is the place where death delights in helping life ,,,,, A motto of many morgues or wards of anatomical pathology. 

 HIC MANEBIMUS OPTIME ,,,,, here we'll stay excellently ,,,,, According to Titus Livius the phrase was pronounced by Marcus Furius Camillus, addressing the senators who intended to abandon the city, invaded by Gauls, circa 390 BC. It is used today to express the intent to keep one's position even if the circumstances appear adverse. 

 HIC SUNT DRACONES ,,,,, here there are dragons ,,,,, Written on a globe engraved on two conjoined halves of ostrich eggs, dated to 1504. 

 HIC SUNT LEONES ,,,,, here there are lions ,,,,, Written on uncharted territories of old maps. 

 HINC ET INDE ,,,,, from both sides ,,,,, 

 HINC ILLAE LACRIMAE ,,,,, hence those tears ,,,,, From Terence, _Andria_, line 125. Originally literal, referring to the tears shed by Pamphilus at the funeral of Chrysis, it came to be used proverbially in the works of later authors, such as Horace (_Epistula_ XIX, 41). 

 HINC ITUR AD ASTRA ,,,,, from here the way leads to the stars ,,,,, Written on the wall of the old astronomical observatory of Vilnius University, Lithuania, and the university's motto. 

 HINC ROBUR ET SECURITAS ,,,,, herefore strength and safety ,,,,, Motto of the Central Bank of Sweden. 

 HISTORIA VITAE MAGISTRA ,,,,, history, the teacher of life ,,,,, From Cicero's _De Oratore_, II, 9. Also "history is the mistress of life". 

 HOC AGE ,,,,, do this ,,,,, Motto of Bradford Grammar School 

 HOC EST BELLUM ,,,,, This is war ,,,,, 

 HOC EST CHRISTUM COGNOSCERE, BENEFICIA EIUS COGNOSCERE ,,,,, To know Christ is to know his benefits ,,,,, Famous dictum by the Reformer Melanchthon in his _Loci Communes_ of 1521 

 HOC EST ENIM CORPUS MEUM ,,,,, For this is my Body ,,,,, The words of Jesus reiterated in Latin during the Roman Catholic Eucharist. Sometimes simply written as "Hoc est corpus meum" or "This is my body". 

 HOC GENUS OMNE ,,,,, All that crowd/people ,,,,, From Horace's _Satires_, 1/2:2. Refers to the crowd at Tigellio's funeral (c. 40–39 BC). Not to be confused with et hoc genus omne (English: and all that sort of thing). 

 HODIE MIHI, CRAS TIBI ,,,,, Today it's me, tomorrow it will be you ,,,,, Inscription that can be seen on tombstones dating from the Middle Ages, meant to outline the ephemerality of life. 

 HOMINEM PAGINA NOSTRA SAPIT ,,,,, It is of man that my page smells ,,,,, From Martial's _Epigrams_, Book 10, No. 4, Line 10; stating his purpose in writing. 

 HOMINEM NON MORBUM CURA ,,,,, Treat the Man, not the Disease ,,,,, Motto of the Far Eastern University – Institute of Nursing 

 HOMO BULLA ,,,,, man is a bubble ,,,,, Varro (116 BC – 27 BC), in the opening line of the first book of _Rerum Rusticarum Libri Tres_, wrote "quod, ut dicitur, si est homo bulla, eo magis senex" (for if, as they say, man is a bubble, all the more so is an old man)^([57]) later reintroduced by Erasmus in his _Adagia_, a collection of sayings published in 1572. 

 HOMO HOMINI LUPUS ,,,,, man [is a] wolf to man ,,,,, First attested in Plautus' _Asinaria_ (lupus est homo homini). The sentence was drawn on by Hobbes in _Leviathan_ as a concise expression of his views on human nature. 

 HOMO MINISTER ET INTERPRES NATURAE ,,,,, Man, the servant and interpreter of nature ,,,,, Motto of the Lehigh University 

 HOMO PRAESUMITUR BONUS DONEC PROBETUR MALUS ,,,,, One is innocent until proven guilty ,,,,, See also: presumption of innocence. 

 HOMO SUM HUMANI A ME NIHIL ALIENUM PUTO ,,,,, I am a human being; nothing human is strange to me ,,,,, From Terence's _Heauton Timorumenos_ (_The Self-Tormentor_) (163 BC). Originally "strange" or "foreign" (_alienum_) was used in the sense of "irrelevant", as this line was a response to the speaker being told to mind his own business, but it is now commonly used to advocate respecting different cultures and being humane in general. _Puto_ (I consider) is not translated because it is meaningless outside of the line's context within the play. 

 HOMO UNIUS LIBRI ,,,,, a man of a single book ,,,,, Attributed to Thomas Aquinas: «Hominem unius libri timeo» “I fear a man of a single book.” 

 HONESTAS ANTE HONORES ,,,,, honesty before glory ,,,,, Motto of King George V School (Hong Kong) 

 HONOR VIRTUTIS PRAEMIUM ,,,,, esteem is the reward of virtue ,,,,, Motto of Arnold School, Blackpool, England 

 HONORIS CAUSA ,,,,, for the sake of honor ,,,,, Said of an honorary title, such as "Doctor of Science _honoris causa_" 

 HORA FUGIT ,,,,, the hour flees ,,,,, See tempus fugit 

 HORA SOMNI (H.S.) ,,,,, at the hour of sleep ,,,,, Medical shorthand for "at bedtime" 

 HORAS NON NUMERO NISI SERENAS ,,,,, I do not count the hours unless they are sunny ,,,,, A common inscription on sundials. 

 HORRESCO REFERENS ,,,,, I shudder as I tell ,,,,, From Virgil's _Aeneid_, 2.204, on the appearance of the sea-serpents who kill the Trojan priest Laocoön and his sons 

 HORRIBILE DICTU ,,,,, horrible to say ,,,,, cf. _mirabile dictu_ 

 HORTUS IN URBE ,,,,, A garden in the city ,,,,, Motto of the Chicago Park District, a playful allusion to the city's motto, _urbs in horto_, q.v. 

 HORTUS SICCUS ,,,,, A dry garden ,,,,, A collection of dry, preserved plants 

 HOSTIS HUMANI GENERIS ,,,,, enemy of the human race ,,,,, Cicero defined pirates in Roman law as being enemies of humanity in general. 

 HUMILITAS OCCIDIT SUPERBIAM ,,,,, humility conquers pride ,,,,, 

 HYPOTHESES NON FINGO ,,,,, I do not fabricate hypotheses ,,,,, From Newton, _Principia_. Less literally, "I do not assert that any hypotheses are true". 

 I, VITELLI, DEI ROMANI SONO BELLI ,,,,, _Go, oh Vitellius, at the war sound of the Roman god_ ,,,,, Perfectly correct Latin sentence usually reported as funny by modern Italians because the same exact words, in Italian, mean "Romans' calves are beautiful", which has a ridiculously different meaning. 

 IBIDEM (IBID.) ,,,,, in the same place ,,,,, Usually used in bibliographic citations to refer to the last source previously referenced. 

 ID EST (I.E.) ,,,,, that is ,,,,, "That is (to say)" in the sense of "that means" and "which means", or "in other words", "namely", or sometimes "in this case", depending on the context. The abbreviation may be followed by a comma or not, depending on the style of the writer (or the grammatical sense of what follows^([33])). The comma is more apt to be dropped before a simple expression with no punctuation of its own, and is more likely to be retained for multiple items.^([29]) _I.e._ is often confused with _e.g._ (_exempli gratia_, 'for example').^([58]) Some writing styles give such abbreviations without punctuation, as _ie_ and _eg_. 

 ID QUOD PLERUMQUE ACCIDIT ,,,,, that which generally happens ,,,,, A phrase used in legal language to indicate the most probable outcome from an act, fact, event or cause. 

 IDEM (ID.) ,,,,, the same ,,,,, Used to refer to something that has already been cited; ditto. See also _ibidem_. 

 IDEM QUOD (I.Q.) ,,,,, the same as ,,,,, Not to be confused with an intelligence quotient. 

 IDUS MARTIAE ,,,,, the Ides of March ,,,,, In the Roman calendar, the Ides of March refers to the 15th day of March. In modern times, the term is best known as the date on which Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC; the term has come to be used as a metaphor for impending doom. 

 JESU JUVA (J.J.) ,,,,, Jesus, help! ,,,,, Used by Johann Sebastian Bach at the beginning of his compositions, which he ended with "S.D.G." (Soli Deo gloria). Compare Besiyata Dishmaya. 

 IESUS NAZARENUS REX IUDAEORUM (INRI) ,,,,, Jesus the Nazarene, King of the Jews ,,,,, ------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- -------------- -- From Vulgate; John 19:19. John 19:20 sta tes that this inscrip tion was written in t hree languages—Aramai c, Latin and Greek—at the top of the cross during the crucifixi on of Jesus. ------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- -------------- -- 

 IGITUR QUI DESIDERAT PACEM, PRAEPARET BELLUM ,,,,, Therefore whoever desires peace, let him prepare for war ,,,,, Publius Flavius Vegetius Renatus, _De Re Militari_; similar to _si vis pacem, para bellum_ and _in pace ut sapiens aptarit idonea bello_. 

 IGNE NATURA RENOVATUR INTEGRA ,,,,, through fire, nature is reborn whole ,,,,, An alchemical aphorism invented as an alternate meaning for the acronym INRI. 

 IGNI FERROQUE ,,,,, with fire and iron ,,,,, A phrase describing scorched earth tactics. Also rendered as _igne atque ferro_, _ferro ignique_, and other variations. 

 IGNIS AURUM PROBAT ,,,,, fire tests gold ,,,,, A phrase referring to the refining of character through difficult circumstances, it is also the motto of the Prometheus Society. 

 IGNIS FATUUS ,,,,, foolish fire ,,,,, Will-o'-the-wisp. 

 IGNORANTIA JURIS NON EXCUSAT ,,,,, (or _ignorantia legis non excusat_ or _ignorantia legis neminem excusat_) ignorance of the law is no excuse ,,,,, A legal principle whereby ignorance of a law does not allow one to escape liability. 

 IGNORATIO ELENCHI ,,,,, ignorance of the issue ,,,,, The logical fallacy of irrelevant conclusion: making an argument that, while possibly valid, doesn't prove or support the proposition it claims to. An _ignoratio elenchi_ that is an intentional attempt to mislead or confuse the opposing party is known as a _red herring_. _Elenchi_ is from the Greek _elenchos_. 

 IGNOTUM PER IGNOTIUS ,,,,, unknown by means of the more unknown ,,,,, An explanation that is less clear than the thing to be explained. Synonymous with _obscurum per obscurius_. 

 IGNOTUS (IGN.) ,,,,, unknown ,,,,, 

 IMAGO DEI ,,,,, image of God ,,,,, From the religious concept that man was created in "God's image". 

 IMITATIO DEI ,,,,, imitation of a god ,,,,, A principle, held by several religions, that believers should strive to resemble their god(s). 

 IMPERIUM IN IMPERIO ,,,,, an order within an order ,,,,, 1. A group of people who owe utmost fealty to their leader(s), subordinating the interests of the larger group to the authority of the internal group's leader(s). 2. A "fifth column" organization operating against the organization within which they seemingly reside. 3. "State within a state" 

 IMPERIUM SINE FINE ,,,,, an empire without an end ,,,,, In Virgil's _Aeneid_, Jupiter ordered Aeneas to found a city (Rome) from which would come an everlasting, never-ending empire, the endless (_sine fine_) empire. 

 IMPOSSIBILIUM NULLA OBLIGATIO EST ,,,,, there is no obligation to do the impossible ,,,,, Publius Juventius Celsus, _Digesta_ L 17, 185. 

 IMPRIMATUR ,,,,, let it be printed ,,,,, An authorization to publish, granted by some censoring authority (originally a Catholic Bishop). 

 IN ABSENTIA ,,,,, in the absence ,,,,, Used in a number of situations, such as in a trial carried out in the absence of the accused. 

 IN ABSENTIA LUCIS, TENEBRAE VINCUNT ,,,,, in the absence of light, darkness prevails ,,,,, 

 IN ACTU ,,,,, in act ,,,,, In the very act; in reality. 

 [DOMINICA] IN ALBIS [DEPOSITIS] ,,,,, [Sunday in Setting Aside the] White Garments ,,,,, Latin name of the Octave of Easter. 

 IN ARTICULO MORTIS ,,,,, at the point of death ,,,,, 

 IN BONO VERITAS ,,,,, truth is in the good ,,,,, 

 IN CAMERA ,,,,, in the chamber ,,,,, In secret. See also _camera obscura_. 

 IN CASU (I.C.) ,,,,, in the event ,,,,, In this case. 

 IN CAUDA VENENUM ,,,,, the poison is in the tail ,,,,, Using the metaphor of a scorpion, this can be said of an account that proceeds gently, but turns vicious towards the end—or more generally waits till the end to reveal an intention or statement that is undesirable in the listener's ears. 

 IN COM. EBOR. ,,,,, In the county of Yorkshire ,,,,, Eboracum was the Roman name for York and this phrase is used in some Georgian and Victorian books on the genealogy of prominent Yorkshire families. 

 IN CHRISTI LUMINE PRO MUNDI VITA ,,,,, in the light of Christ for the life on the world ,,,,, Motto of Pontifical Catholic University of Chile. 

 IN DEO SPERAMUS ,,,,, in God we hope ,,,,, Motto of Brown University. 

 IN DUBIO PRO REO ,,,,, in doubt, on behalf of the [alleged] culprit ,,,,, Expresses the judicial principle that in case of doubt the decision must be in favor of the accused (in that anyone is innocent until there is PROOF to the contrary). 

 IN DUPLO ,,,,, in double ,,,,, In duplicate 

 IN EFFIGIE ,,,,, in the likeness ,,,,, In (the form of) an image; in effigy (as opposed to "in the flesh" or "in person"). 

 IN ESSE ,,,,, in existence ,,,,, In actual existence; as opposed to IN POSSE. 

 IN EXTENSO ,,,,, in the extended ,,,,, In full; at full length; complete or unabridged 

 IN EXTREMIS ,,,,, in the furthest reaches ,,,,, In extremity; in dire straits; also "at the point of death" (cf. _in articulo mortis_). 

 IN FIDE SCIENTIAM ,,,,, To our faith add knowledge ,,,,, Motto of Newington College. 

 IN FIDEM ,,,,, into faith ,,,,, To the verification of faith. 

 IN FIERI ,,,,, in becoming ,,,,, In progress; pending. 

 IN FINE (I.F.) ,,,,, in the end ,,,,, At the end. The footnote says "p. 157 in fine": "the e nd of page 157". 

 IN FLAGRANTE DELICTO ,,,,, in a blazing wrong, while the crime is blazing ,,,,, Caught in the act (esp. a crime or in a "compromising position"); equivalent to "caught red-handed" in English idiom. 

 IN FLORE ,,,,, in blossom ,,,,, Blooming. 

 IN FORO ,,,,, in forum ,,,,, In court (legal term). 

 IN GIRUM IMUS NOCTE ET CONSUMIMUR IGNI ,,,,, We enter the circle at night and are consumed by fire ,,,,, A palindrome said to describe the behavior of moths. Also the title of a film by Guy Debord. 

 IN HARMONIA PROGRESSIO ,,,,, progress in harmony ,,,,, Motto of Bandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia. 

 IN HOC SENSU or IN SENSU HOC (s.h.) ,,,,, in this sense ,,,,, Recent academic abbreviation for "in this sense". 

 IN HOC SIGNO VINCES ,,,,, by this sign you will conquer ,,,,, Words Constantine the Great claimed to have seen in a vision before the Battle of the Milvian Bridge. 

 IN HUNC EFFECTUM ,,,,, for this purpose ,,,,, Describes a meeting called for a particular stated purpose only. 

 IN ICTU OCULI ,,,,, in the blink of an eye ,,,,, 

 IN ILLO ORDINE (I.O.) ,,,,, in that order ,,,,, Recent academic substitution for the spacious and inconvenient "..., respectively." 

 IN ILLO TEMPORE ,,,,, in that time ,,,,, At that time, found often in Gospel lectures during Masses, used to mark an undetermined time in the past. 

 IN INCEPTUM FINIS EST ,,,,, lit.: in the beginning is the end ,,,,, or: the beginning foreshadows the end 

 IN LIMINE ,,,,, at the outset/threshold ,,,,, Preliminary, in law, a motion in limine is a motion that is made to the judge before or during trial, often about the admissibility of evidence believed prejudicial. 

 IN LOCO ,,,,, in the place, on the spot ,,,,, That is, 'on site'. "The nearby labs were closed for the weekend, so the water samples were analyzed _in loco_." 

 IN LOCO PARENTIS ,,,,, in the place of a parent ,,,,, Assuming parental or custodial responsibility and authority (e.g., schoolteachers over students); a legal term. 

 IN LUCE TUA VIDEMUS LUCEM ,,,,, in Thy light we see light ,,,,, Motto of Valparaiso University. The phrase comes from the book of Psalms 36:9 "For with you is the fountain of life; in your light we see light." 

 IN LUMINE TUO VIDEBIMUS LUMEN ,,,,, in your light we will see the light ,,,,, Motto of Columbia University, Presbyterian Boys' Secondary School and Ohio Wesleyan University. Also, it is the motto of the South African University of Fort Hare. 

 IN MANUS TUAS COMMENDO SPIRITUM MEUM ,,,,, into your hands I entrust my spirit ,,,,, According to Luke 23:46, the last words of Jesus on the cross. 

 IN MEDIAS RES ,,,,, into the middle of things ,,,,, From Horace. Refers to the literary technique of beginning a narrative in the middle of, or at a late point in, the story, after much action has already taken place. Examples include the _Iliad_, the _Odyssey_, _Os Lusíadas_, _Othello_, and _Paradise Lost_. Compare _ab initio_. 

 IN MEMORIAM ,,,,, into the memory ,,,,, Equivalent to "in the memory of". Refers to remembering or honoring a deceased person. 

 IN NATURA ,,,,, ,,,,, 

 IN NECESSARIIS UNITAS, IN DUBIIS LIBERTAS, IN OMNIBUS CARITAS ,,,,, in necessary things unity, in doubtful things liberty, in all things charity ,,,,, "Charity" (_caritas_) is being used in the classical sense of "compassion" (cf. _agape_). Motto of the Cartellverband der katholischen deutschen Studentenverbindungen . Often misattributed to Augustine of Hippo.^([_citation\ n eeded_]) 

 IN NOCTE CONSILIUM ,,,,, advice comes over night ,,,,, I.e., "Tomorrow is a new day." Motto of Birkbeck College, University of London. 

 IN NOMINE DIABOLI ,,,,, in the name of the devil ,,,,, 

 IN NOMINE DOMINI ,,,,, in the name of the Lord ,,,,, Motto of Trinity College, Perth, Australia; the name of a 1050 papal bull 

 IN NOMINE PATRIS, ET FILII, ET SPIRITUS SANCTI ,,,,, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit ,,,,, invocation of the Holy Trinity 

 IN NUCE ,,,,, in a nut ,,,,, in a nutshell; briefly stated; potential; in the embryonic phase 

 IN OMNIA PARATUS ,,,,, Ready for anything. ,,,,, Motto of the United States Army's 18th Infantry Regiment 

 IN OMNIBUS AMARE ET SERVIRE DOMINO ,,,,, In everything, love and serve the Lord. ,,,,, The motto of Ateneo de Iloilo, a school in the Philippines 

 IN OMNIBUS REQUIEM QUAESIVI, ET NUSQUAM INVENI NISI IN ANGULO CUM LIBRO ,,,,, Everywhere I have searched for peace and nowhere found it, except in a corner with a book ,,,,, Quote by Thomas à Kempis 

 IN OVO ,,,,, in the egg or in the embryo ,,,,, An experiment or process performed in an egg or embryo (e.g. in ovo electroporation of chicken embryo). 

 IN PACE UT SAPIENS APTARIT IDONEA BELLO ,,,,, in peace, like the wise man, make preparations for war ,,,,, Horace, _Satires_ 2/2:111; similar to _si vis pacem, para bellum_ and _igitur qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum_. 

 IN PACE REQUIESCAT ,,,,, in peace may he rest ,,,,, Alternate form of _requiescat in pace_ ("let him rest in peace"). Found in this form at the end of The Cask of Amontillado by Edgar Allan Poe. 

 IN PARI MATERIA ,,,,, upon the same matter or subject ,,,,, In statutory interpretation, when a statute is ambiguous, its meaning may be determined in light of other statutes on the same subject matter. 

 IN PARTIBUS INFIDELIUM ,,,,, in the parts of the infidels ,,,,, "In the land of the infidels"; used to refer to bishoprics that remains as titular sees even after the corresponding territory was conquered by Muslim empires. 

 IN PECTORE ,,,,, in the heart ,,,,, A cardinal named in secret by the pope. See also _ab imo pectore_. 

 IN PERSONAM ,,,,, into a person ,,,,, Directed towards a particular person 

 IN POSSE ,,,,, in potential ,,,,, In the state of being possible; as opposed to IN ESSE. 

 IN PROPRIA PERSONA ,,,,, in one's own person ,,,,, Abbreviated _pro per_; For one's self, For the sake of one's 'Personhood'; acting on one's own behalf, especially a person representing himself in a legal proceeding; see also litigant in person, pro se legal representation in the United States. 

 IN PRINCIPIO ERAT VERBUM ,,,,, in the beginning was the Word (Logos) ,,,,, Beginning of the Gospel of John 

 IN RE ,,,,, in the matter [of] ,,,,, A legal term used to indicate that a judicial proceeding may not have formally designated adverse parties or is otherwise uncontested. The term is commonly used in case citations of probate proceedings, for example, _In re Smith's Estate_; it is also used in juvenile courts, as, for instance, _In re Gault_. 

 IN REBUS ,,,,, in the thing [itself] ,,,,, Primarily of philosophical use to discuss properties and property exemplification. In philosophy of mathematics, it is typically contrasted with "ante rem" and, more recently, "post res" structuralism. Sometimes _in re_ is used in place of _in rebus_. 

 IN REGIONE CAECORUM REX EST LUSCUS ,,,,, In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king. ,,,,, A quote of Desiderius Erasmus from Adagia (first published 1500, with numerous expanded editions through 1536), III, IV, 96. 

 IN REM ,,,,, to the thing ,,,,, Legal term indicating a court's jurisdiction over a piece of property rather than a legal person; contrast with personal (_ad personam_) jurisdiction. See In rem jurisdiction; Quasi in rem jurisdiction 

 IN RERUM NATURA ,,,,, in the nature of things ,,,,, See also Lucretius' _De rerum natura_ (On the Nature of Things). 

 IN RETENTIS ,,,,, among things held back ,,,,, Used to describe documents kept separately from the regular records of a court for special reasons. 

 IN SAECULA (SAECULORUM), in saeculum saeculi ,,,,, _roughly_: down to the times of the times ,,,,, forever (and ever), _liturgical_ 

 IN SAECULO ,,,,, in the times ,,,,, In the secular world, esp. outside a monastery, or before death. 

 IN SALVO ,,,,, in safety ,,,,, 

 IN SCIENTIA OPPORTUNITAS (Dog Latin) ,,,,, In Knowledge, there is Opportunity ,,,,, Motto of Edge Hill University. 

 IN SCIENTIA ET VIRTUE ,,,,, In Knowledge, and Virtue ,,,,, Motto of St. Joseph's College, Colombo. Sri Lanka. 

 IN SE MAGNA RUUNT ,,,,, great things collapse of their own weight ,,,,, Lucan, Pharsalia 1:81. 

 IN SILICO (Dog Latin) ,,,,, in silicon ,,,,, Coined in the late 1980s for scientific papers. Refers to an experiment or process performed virtually, as a computer simulation. The term is Dog Latin modeled after terms such as _in vitro_ and _in vivo_. The Latin word for silicon is _silicium_, so the correct Latinization of "in silicon" would be _in silicio_, but this form has little usage. 

 IN SITU ,,,,, in the place ,,,,, In the original place, appropriate position, or natural arrangement. 

 IN SOMNIS VERITAS ,,,,, In dreams there is truth ,,,,, 

 IN SPE ,,,,, in hope ,,,,, "future" (My mother-in-law _in spe_", _i.e.,_ "My future mother-in-law), or "in embryonic form", as in "Locke's theory of government resembles, _in spe_, Montesquieu's theory of the separation of powers." 

 IN SPECIALIBUS GENERALIA QUAERIMUS ,,,,, To seek the general in the specifics ,,,,, That is, to understand the most general rules through the most detailed analysis. 

 IN STATU NASCENDI ,,,,, in the state of being born ,,,,, Just as something is about to begin 

 IN TOTO ,,,,, in all ,,,,, Totally; entirely; completely. 

 IN TRIPLO ,,,,, in triple ,,,,, In triplicate. 

 IN UMBRA, IGITUR, PUGNABIMUS ,,,,, Then we will fight in the shade ,,,,, 

 IN UTERO ,,,,, in the womb ,,,,, 

 IN UTRUMQUE PARATUS ,,,,, prepared for either (event) ,,,,, 

 IN VACUO ,,,,, in a void ,,,,, In a vacuum; isolated from other things. 

 IN VARIETATE CONCORDIA ,,,,, united in diversity ,,,,, The motto of the European Union and the Council of Europe 

 INVIDIAE PRUDENTIA VICTRIX ,,,,, prudence conquers jealousy ,,,,, 

 IN VINO VERITAS ,,,,, in wine [there is] truth ,,,,, That is, wine loosens the tongue (referring to alcohol's disinhibitory effects). 

 IN VITRO ,,,,, in glass ,,,,, An experimental or process methodology performed in a "non-natural" setting (e.g. in a laboratory using a glass test tube or Petri dish), and thus outside of a living organism or cell. Alternative experimental or process methodologies include _in vitro_, _in silico_, _ex vivo_ and _in vivo_. 

 IN VIVO ,,,,, in life/in a living thing ,,,,, An experiment or process performed on a living specimen. 

 IN VIVO VERITAS ,,,,, in a living thing [there is] truth ,,,,, An expression used by biologists to express the fact that laboratory findings from testing an organism _in vitro_ are not always reflected when applied to an organism _in vivo_. A pun on in vino veritas. 

 INCEPTO NE DESISTAM ,,,,, May I not shrink from my purpose! ,,,,, Westville Boys' High School and Westville Girls' High School's motto is taken directly from Virgil. These words, found in Aeneid, Book 1, are used by Juno, queen of heaven who hated the Trojans led by Aeneas. When she saw the fleet of Aeneas on its way to Italy, after the sack of Troy by the Greeks, she planned to scatter it by means of strong winds. In her determination to accomplish her task she cried out "Incepto Ne Desistam!" 

 INCERTAE SEDIS ,,,,, of uncertain position (seat) ,,,,, A term used to classify a taxonomic group when its broader relationships are unknown or undefined. 

 INCREDIBILE DICTU ,,,,, incredible to say ,,,,, A variant on _mirabile dictu_. 

 INTUS ET IN CUTE ,,,,, Inwardly, under the skin [intimately, without reservation] ,,,,, Persius, _Satire_ 3:30. 

 INDEX LIBRORUM PROHIBITORUM ,,,,, Index of Prohibited (or, Forbidden) Books ,,,,, A list of books considered heretical by the Roman Catholic Church. 

 INDIGENS DEO ,,,,, being-in-need-of-God, beggar before God ,,,,, From Augustine, _De Civitate Dei_ XII, 1.3: _beatitudinem consequatur nec expleat indigentiam suam_, "since it is not satisfied unless it be perfectly blessed." 

 INDIGNOR QUANDOQUE BONUS DORMITAT HOMERUS ,,,,, I too am annoyed whenever good Homer nods off ,,,,, Horace, _Ars Poetica_ 358 

 INDIVISIBILITER AC INSEPARABILITER ,,,,, indivisible and inseparable ,,,,, Motto of Austria-Hungary before it was divided and separated into independent states in 1918. 

 INFINITUS EST NUMERUS STULTORUM. ,,,,, Infinite is the number of fools. ,,,,, 

 INFIRMA MUNDI ELEGIT DEUS ,,,,, God chooses the weak of the world ,,,,, The motto of Venerable Vital-Justin Grandin, the bishop of the St. Albert Diocese, which is now the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Edmonton 

 INFRA DIGNITATEM (INFRA DIG) ,,,,, beneath one's dignity ,,,,, 

 INGENIO STAT SINE MORTE DECUS ,,,,, The honors of genius are eternal ,,,,, Propertius, _Elegies_ Book III, 2 

 INIURIAE QUI ADDIDERIS CONTUMELIAM ,,,,, You who have added insult to injury ,,,,, Phaedrus, _Fables_ 5/3:5. 

 INOPIAE DESUNT MULTA, AVARITIAE OMNIA ,,,,, To poverty many things are lacking; to avarice, everything ,,,,, Publilius Syrus. 

 INSITA HOMINIBUS LIBIDINE ALENDI DE INDUSTRIA RUMORES ,,,,, Men have an innate desire to propagate rumors or reports ,,,,, Titus Livius, (XXVII, XXIV); Michel de Montaigne, (Essays). 

 INSTANTE MENSE (INST.) ,,,,, in the present month ,,,,, Used in formal correspondence to refer to the current month, sometimes abbreviated as _inst_; e.g.: "Thank you for your letter of the 17th inst."—_ult. mense_ = last month, _prox. mense_ = next month. 

 INSTRUMENTUM REGNI ,,,,, instrument of government ,,,,, Used to express the exploitation of religion by State or ecclesiastical polity as a means of controlling the masses, or in particular to achieve political and mundane ends. 

 INSTRUMENTUM VOCALE ,,,,, instrument with voice ,,,,, So Varro in his _De re rustica_ (_On Agriculture_) defines the slave: an instrument (as a simple plow, or etc.) with voice. 

 INTAMINATIS FULGET HONORIBUS ,,,,, Untarnished, she shines with honor ,,,,, From Horace's Odes (III.2.18). Motto of Wofford College. 

 INTEGER VITAE SCELERISQUE PURUS ,,,,, unimpaired by life and clean of wickedness ,,,,, From Horace. Used as a funeral hymn. 

 INTELLIGENTI PAUCA ,,,,, Few words suffice for he who understands ,,,,, 

 INTER ALIA (I.A.) ,,,,, among other things ,,,,, A term used in formal extract minutes to indicate that the minute quoted has been taken from a fuller record of other matters, or when alluding to the parent group after quoting a particular example. 

 INTER ALIOS ,,,,, among others ,,,,, Often used to compress lists of parties to legal documents 

 INTER ARMA ENIM SILENT LEGES ,,,,, in a time of war, the law falls silent ,,,,, Said by Cicero in _Pro Milone_ as a protest against unchecked political mobs that had virtually seized control of Rome in the 60s and 50s BC. Famously quoted in the essay _Civil Disobedience_ by Henry David Thoreau as "The clatter of arms drowns out the voice of the law". This phrase has also been jokingly translated as "In a time of arms, the legs are silent." 

 INTER CAETERA ,,,,, among others ,,,,, Title of a papal bull 

 INTER MUTANDA CONSTANTIA ,,,,, Steadfast in the midst of change ,,,,, Motto for Rockwell College in Ireland and Francis Libermann Catholic High School in Ontario, Canada 

 INTER SPEM ET METUM ,,,,, between hope and fear ,,,,, 

 INTER URINAS ET FAECES NASCIMUR ,,,,, we are born between urine and feces ,,,,, Attributed to St Augustine 

 INTER VIVOS ,,,,, between the living ,,,,, Refers to property transfers between living persons, as opposed to a testamentary transfer upon death such as an inheritance; often relevant to tax laws. 

 INTRA MUROS ,,,,, within the walls ,,,,, Not public; source of the word _intramural_. See also Intramuros, Manila. 

 INTRA VIRES ,,,,, within the powers ,,,,, Within one's authority 

 INVENIAS ETIAM DISIECTI MEMBRA POETAE ,,,,, You would still recognize the scattered fragments of a poet ,,,,, Horace, _Satires_, I, 4, 62, in reference to the earlier Roman poet Ennius 

 INVENIET QUOD QUISQUE VELIT ,,,,, Each shall find what he desires ,,,,, Attributed to Petronius^([59]) or Prudentius. Motto of _Nature in Cambridgeshire_:^([60 ]) Inveniet quod quisque velit; non omnibus unum est, quod placet; hic spinas colligit, ille rosas. ("Each shall find what he desires; no one thing pleases all; one gathers thorns, another roses.") 

 INVICTA ,,,,, Unconquered ,,,,, Motto of the English county of Kent and the city of Oporto 

 INVICTUS MANEO ,,,,, I remain unvanquished ,,,,, Motto of the Armstrong Clan 

 IOHANNES EST NOMEN EIUS ,,,,, John is his name ,,,,, Motto of the Seal of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 

 IPSA SCIENTIA POTESTAS EST ,,,,, knowledge itself is power ,,,,, Famous phrase written by Sir Francis Bacon in 1597 

 IPSE DIXIT ,,,,, he himself said it ,,,,, Commonly said in Medieval debates and referring to Aristotle. Used in general to emphasize that some assertion comes from some authority, i.e., as an argument from authority, and the term _ipse-dixitism_ has come to mean any unsupported rhetorical assertion that lacks a logical argument. A literal translation by Cicero (in his _De Natura Deorum_ 1.10) of the Greek «αὐτὸς ἔφα», an invocation by Pythagoreans when appealing to the pronouncements of the master. 

 IPSISSIMA VERBA ,,,,, the very words themselves ,,,,, "Strictly word for word" (cf. _verbatim_). Often used in Biblical Studies to describe the record of Jesus' teaching found in the New Testament (specifically, the four Gospels). 

 IPSISSIMA VOCE ,,,,, in the very 'voice' itself ,,,,, To approximate the main thrust or message without using the exact words 

 IPSO FACTO ,,,,, by the fact itself ,,,,, By that very fact 

 IRA DEORUM ,,,,, wrath of the gods ,,,,, Like the vast majority of inhabitants of the ancient world, the ancient Romans practiced pagan rituals, believing it important to achieve a state of _pax deorum_ (peace of the gods) instead of _ira deorum_ (wrath of the gods): earthquakes, floods, famine, etc. 

 IRA FUROR BREVIS EST ,,,,, Wrath (anger) is but a brief madness ,,,,, 

 ITA VERO ,,,,, thus indeed ,,,,, A useful phrase, as the Romans had no word for "yes", preferring to respond to questions with the affirmative or negative of the question (e.g., "Are you hungry?" was answered by "I am hungry" or "I am not hungry", not "Yes" or "No). 

 ITE, MISSA EST ,,,,, Go, it is the dismissal ,,,,, Loosely: "You have been dismissed". Concluding words addressed to the people in the Mass of the Roman Rite.^([61]) 

 ITER LEGIS ,,,,, The path of the law ,,,,, The path a law takes from its conception to its implementation 

 IUCUNDA MEMORIA EST PRAETERITORUM MALORUM ,,,,, Pleasant is the memory of past troubles ,,,,, Cicero, _De finibus bonorum et malorum_ 2, 32, 105 

 IUGULARE MORTUOS ,,,,, to cut the throat of corpses ,,,,, From Gerhard Gerhards' (1466–1536) [better known as Erasmus] collection of annotated Adagia (1508). It can mean attacking the work or personality of deceased person. Alternatively, it can be used to describe criticism of an individual already heavily criticised by others. 

 IUNCTA IUVANT ,,,,, together they strive ,,,,, also spelled _juncta juvant_; from the legal principle _quae non valeant singula, iuncta iuvant_ ("What is without value on its own, helps when joined") 

 IURA NOVIT CURIA ,,,,, the court knows the law ,,,,, A legal principle in civil law countries of the Roman-German tradition that says that lawyers need not to argue the law, as that is the office of the court. Sometimes miswritten as _iura novat curia_ (the court renews the laws). 

 IURE MATRIS ,,,,, in right of his mother ,,,,, Indicates a right exercised by a son on behalf of his mother 

 IURE UXORIS ,,,,, in right of his wife ,,,,, Indicates a right exercised by a husband on behalf of his wife 

 IURIS IGNORANTIA EST CUM IUS NOSTRUM IGNORAMUS ,,,,, it is ignorance of the law when we do not know our own rights ,,,,, 

 IUS ACCRESCENDI ,,,,, right of accrual ,,,,, Commonly referred to as "right of survivorship": a rule in property law that surviving joint tenants have rights in equal shares to a decedent's property 

 IUS AD BELLUM ,,,,, law towards war ,,,,, Refers to the laws that regulate the reasons for going to war. Typically, this would address issues of self-defense or preemptive strikes. 

 IUS COGENS ,,,,, compelling law ,,,,, Refers to a fundamental principle of international law considered to have acceptance among the international community of states as a whole. Typically, this would address issues not listed or defined by any authoritative body, but arise out of case law and changing social and political attitudes. Generally included are prohibitions on waging aggressive war, crimes against humanity, war crimes, piracy, genocide, slavery, and torture. 

 IUS IN BELLO ,,,,, law in war ,,,,, Refers to the "laws" that regulate the conduct of combatants during a conflict. Typically, this would address issues of who or what is a valid target, how to treat prisoners, and what sorts of weapons can be used. The word _jus_ is also commonly spelled _ius_. 

 IUS PRIMAE NOCTIS ,,,,, law of the first night ,,,,, The _droit de seigneur_ 

 IUSTITIA FUNDAMENTUM REGNI ,,,,, justice is the foundation of a reign ,,,,, Motto of the Supreme Public Prosecutor's Office of the Czech Republic 

 IUSTITIA OMNIBUS ,,,,, justice for all ,,,,, The motto of Washington, D.C. 

 IUVENTUTI NIL ARDUUM ,,,,, to the young nothing is difficult ,,,,, Motto of Canberra Girls Grammar School 

 IUVENTUTIS VEHO FORTUNAS ,,,,, I bear the fortunes of youth ,,,,, Motto of Dollar Academy 

 LABOR IPSE VOLUPTAS ,,,,, The pleasure is in the work itself. ,,,,, Motto of Leopold von Ranke (Manilius IV 155)


 LABOR OMNIA VINCIT ,,,,, Hard work conquers all. ,,,,, Popular as a motto; derived from a phrase in Virgil's _Eclogue_ (X.69: _omnia vincit Amor_ – "Love conquers all"); a similar phrase also occurs in his _Georgics_ I.145. Motto of St. Xavier's Institution, Penang. Motto of Brinkworth Area School, South Australia. Motto of Princes Street Primary School, Tasmania, Australia.^([62]) Motto of Maitland Grossmann High School, New South Wales, Australia.^([63])


 LABORARE PUGNARE PARATI SUMUS ,,,,, To work, (or) to fight; we are ready ,,,,, Motto of the California Maritime Academy


 LABORE ET HONORE ,,,,, By labour and honour ,,,,, 


 LABOREMUS PRO PATRIA ,,,,, Let us work for the fatherland ,,,,, Motto of the Carlsberg breweries


 LABORIS GLORIA LUDI ,,,,, Games are the glory of work, ,,,,, Motto of the Camborne School of Mines, Cornwall, UK


 LACRIMAE RERUM ,,,,, The poignancy of things. ,,,,, Virgil, _Aeneid_ 1:462


 LAPSUS ,,,,, lapse, slip, error; involuntary mistake made while writing or speaking ,,,,, 


 LAPSUS CALAMI ,,,,, inadvertent typographical error, slip of the pen ,,,,,  


 LAPSUS LINGUAE ,,,,, inadvertent speech error, slip of the tongue ,,,,,  


 LAPSUS MEMORIAE ,,,,, slip of memory ,,,,, source of the term _memory lapse_


 LATIUS EST IMPUNITUM RELINQUI FACINUS NOCENTIS (QUAM INNOCENTEM DAMNARI) ,,,,, It is better to let the crime of the guilty go unpunished (than to condemn the innocent) ,,,,, Ulpian, _Digest_ 5:6.


 LAUDA FINEM ,,,,, praise to the end ,,,,, Motto of Nottingham High School


 LAUDATIO EJUS MANET IN SECULA SECULORUM ,,,,, His Praise Remains unto Ages of Ages ,,,,, Motto of Galway


 LAUDATOR TEMPORIS ACTI ,,,,, praiser of time past ,,,,, One who is discontent with the present and instead prefers things of the past ("the good old days"). In Horace's _Ars Poetica_, line 173


 LAUDETUR JESUS CHRISTUS ,,,,, Praise (Be) Jesus Christ ,,,,, Often used as a salutation, but also used after prayers or the reading of the gospel


 LAUS DEO ,,,,, praise be to God ,,,,, Inscription on the east side at the peak of the Washington Monument in Washington, D.C.; motto of the Viscount of Arbuthnott and Sydney Grammar School


 LECTIO BREVIOR POTIOR ,,,,, The shorter reading is the better ,,,,, A maxim in text criticism. Codified, but simultaneously refuted, by Marxist educators.^([_citation\ needed_])


 LECTORI SALUTEM ,,,,, greetings reader ,,,,, Often abbreviated to L.S., used as opening words for a letter


 LEGE ARTIS ,,,,, according to the law of the art ,,,,, Denotes that a certain intervention is performed in a correct way. Used especially in a medical context. The 'art' referred to in the phrase is medicine.


 LEGEM TERRAE ,,,,, the law of the land ,,,,, 


 LEGES HUMANAE NASCUNTUR, VIVUNT, ET MORIUNTUR ,,,,, laws of man are born, live and die ,,,,, 


 LEGES SINE MORIBUS VANAE ,,,,, laws without morals [are] vain ,,,,, From Horace's Odes; motto of the University of Pennsylvania


 LEGIO PATRIA NOSTRA ,,,,, The Legion is our fatherland ,,,,, Motto of the French Foreign Legion


 LEGI, INTELLEXI, ET CONDEMNAVI ,,,,, I read, understood, and condemned. ,,,,, 


 LEGIS PLENITUDO CHARITAS ,,,,, charity (love) is the fulfilment of the law ,,,,, Motto of Ratcliffe College, UK and of the Rosmini College, NZ


 LEGITIME ,,,,, lawfully ,,,,, In Roman and civil law, a forced share in an estate; the portion of the decedent's estate from which the immediate family cannot be disinherited. From the French _héritier legitime_ (rightful heir).


 LEX ARTIS ,,,,, law of the skill ,,,,, The rules that regulate a professional duty.


 LEX DEI VITAE LAMPAS ,,,,, the law of God is the lamp of life ,,,,, Motto of the Presbyterian Ladies' College, Melbourne


 LEX FERENDA ,,,,, the law that should be borne ,,,,, The law as it ought to be.


 LEX HAC EDICTALI ,,,,, the law here proclaims ,,,,, The rule whereby a spouse cannot by deed inter vivos or bequeath by testament to his or her second spouse more than the amount of the smallest portion given or bequeathed to any child.


 LEX IN CASU ,,,,, law in the event ,,,,, A law that only concerns one particular case. See law of the case.


 LEX LATA ,,,,, the law that has been borne ,,,,, The law as it is.


 LEX LOCI ,,,,, law of the place ,,,,, 


 LEX NON SCRIPTA ,,,,, law that has not been written ,,,,, Unwritten law, or common law


 LEX ORANDI, LEX CREDENDI ,,,,, the law of prayer is the law of faith ,,,,, 


 LEX PACIFERAT ,,,,, the law shall bring peace ,,,,, Motto of the European Gendarmerie Force


 LEX PARSIMONIAE ,,,,, law of succinctness ,,,,, also known as Occam's Razor


 LEX REX ,,,,, the law [is] king ,,,,, A principle of government advocating a rule by law rather than by men. The phrase originated as a double entendre in the title of Samuel Rutherford's controversial book _Lex, Rex_ (1644), which espoused a theory of limited government and constitutionalism.


 LEX SCRIPTA ,,,,, written law ,,,,, Statutory law; contrasted with _lex non scripta_


 LEX TALIONIS ,,,,, the law of retaliation ,,,,, Retributive justice (i.e., eye for an eye)


 LIBERA TE TUTEMET (EX INFERIS) ,,,,, Free yourself (from hell) ,,,,, Used in the movie _Event Horizon_ (1997), where it is translated as "save yourself (from hell)". It is initially misheard as _liberate me_ (free me), but is later corrected. _Libera te_ is often mistakenly merged into _liberate_, which would necessitate a plural pronoun instead of the singular _tutemet_ (which is an emphatic form of _tu_, you).


 LIBERTAS JUSTITIA VERITAS ,,,,, Liberty Justice Truth ,,,,, Motto of the Korea University and Freie Universität Berlin


 LIBERTAS PERFUNDET OMNIA LUCE ,,,,, Freedom will flood all things with light ,,,,, Motto of the University of Barcelona and the Complutense University of Madrid


 LIBERTAS QUAE SERA TAMEN ,,,,, freedom which [is] however late ,,,,, Liberty even when it comes late; motto of Minas Gerais, Brazil


 LIBERTAS SECURITAS JUSTITIA ,,,,, Liberty Security Justice ,,,,, Motto of the Frontex


 LIBRA (LB) ,,,,, balance; scales ,,,,, Its abbreviation lb is used as a unit of weight, the pound.


 LITTERA SCRIPTA MANET ,,,,, The written word endures ,,,,, Attributed to Horace


 LOCO CITATO (LC) ,,,,, in the place cited ,,,,, More fully written _in loco citato_; see also _opere citato_


 LOCUM TENENS ,,,,, place holder ,,,,, A worker who temporarily takes the place of another with similar qualifications, for example as a doctor or a member of the clergy; usually shortened to _locum_.


 LOCUS CLASSICUS ,,,,, a classic place ,,,,, The most typical or classic case of something; quotation which most typifies its use.


 LOCUS MINORIS RESISTENTIAE ,,,,, place of less resistance ,,,,, A medical term to describe a location on or in a body that offers little resistance to infection, damage, or injury. For example, a weakened place that tends to be reinjured.


 LOCUS POENITENTIAE ,,,,, a place of repentance ,,,,, A legal term, it is the opportunity of withdrawing from a projected contract, before the parties are finally bound; or of abandoning the intention of committing a crime, before it has been completed.


 LOCUS STANDI ,,,,, A right to stand ,,,,, Standing in law (the right to have one's case in court)


 LONGISSIMUS DIES CITO CONDITUR ,,,,, even the longest day soon ends ,,,,, Pliny the Younger, _Epistulae_ 9/36:4


 LOREM IPSUM ,,,,, sorrow itself; pain for its own sake ,,,,, A mangled fragment from Cicero's _De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum_ (On the Limits of Good and Evil, 45 BC), used as typographer's filler to show fonts (a.k.a. _greeking_). (The first syllable of _lorem_ is cut off; the original was _dolorem ipsum'_).


 LUCEAT LUX VESTRA ,,,,, Let your light shine ,,,,, From Matthew Ch. 5 V. 16; popular as a school motto


 LUCEM SEQUIMUR ,,,,, We follow the light ,,,,, Motto of the University of Exeter


 LUCEO NON URO ,,,,, I shine, not burn ,,,,, Motto of the Highland Scots Clan Mackenzie


 LUCIDA SIDERA ,,,,, The shining stars ,,,,, Horace, _Carmina_ 1/3:2


 LUCTOR ET EMERGO ,,,,, I struggle and emerge ,,,,, Motto of the Dutch province of Zeeland to denote its battle against the sea, and the Athol Murray College of Notre Dame


 LUCTOR, NON MERGOR ,,,,, 'I struggle, but am not overwhelmed ,,,,, Motto of the Glass Family (Sauchie, Scotland)^([64])


 LUCUS A NON LUCENDO ,,,,, [it is] a grove by not being light ,,,,, From late 4th-century grammarian Honoratus Maurus, who sought to mock implausible word origins such as those proposed by Priscian. A pun based on the word _lucus_ (dark grove) having a similar appearance to the verb _lucere_ (to shine), arguing that the former word is derived from the latter word because of a lack of light in wooded groves. Often used as an example of absurd etymology, it derives from parum luceat (it does not shine [being darkened by shade]) by Quintilian in _Institutio Oratoria_.


 LUDEMUS BENE IN COMPANIA ,,,,, We play well in groups ,,,,, Motto of the Barony of Marinus


 LUPUS EST HOMO HOMINI ,,,,, A man to a man is a wolf ,,,,, Plautus' adaptation of an old Roman proverb: homo homini lupus est ("man is a wolf to [his fellow] man"). In _Asinaria_, act II, scene IV, verse 89 [495 overall]. Lupus est homo homini, non homo, quom qualis sit non novit ("a man to a man is a wolf, not a man, when the other doesn't know of what character he is.")^([65])


 LUPUS IN FABULA ,,,,, the wolf in the story ,,,,, With the meaning "speak of the wolf, and he will come"; from Terence's play _Adelphoe_.


 LUPUS NON MORDET LUPUM ,,,,, a wolf does not bite a wolf ,,,,, 


 LUPUS NON TIMET CANEM LATRANTEM ,,,,, a wolf is not afraid of a barking dog ,,,,, 


 LUX AETERNA ,,,,, eternal light ,,,,, epitaph


 LUX ET LEX ,,,,, light and law ,,,,, Motto of the Franklin & Marshall College and the University of North Dakota


 LUX ET VERITAS ,,,,, light and truth ,,,,, A translation of the Hebrew Urim and Thummim. Motto of several institutions, including Yale University.


 LUX EX TENEBRIS ,,,,, light from darkness ,,,,, Motto of the 67th Network Warfare Wing


 LUX HOMINUM VITA ,,,,, light the life of man ,,,,, Motto of the University of New Mexico


 LUX IN DOMINO ,,,,, light in the Lord ,,,,, Motto of the Ateneo de Manila University


 LUX IN TENEBRIS LUCET ,,,,, The light that shines in the darkness ,,,,, Motto of Columbia University School of General Studies^([66]) Also: John 1:5.


 LUX LIBERTAS ,,,,, light and liberty ,,,,, Motto of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


 LUX MENTIS LUX ORBIS ,,,,, Light of the mind, Light of the world ,,,,, Motto of Sonoma State University


 LUX SIT ,,,,, let there be light ,,,,, A more literal Latinization of the phrase; the most common translation is _fiat lux_, from Latin Vulgate Bible phrase chosen for the Genesis line "וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלֹהִים, יְהִי אוֹר; וַיְהִי-אוֹר" (And God said: 'Let there be light.' And there was light). Motto of the University of Washington.


 LUX TUA NOS DUCAT ,,,,, Your Light Guides Us ,,,,, Motto of St. Julian's School, Carcavelos, Portugal^([67])


 LUX, VERITAS, VIRTUS ,,,,, light, truth, courage ,,,,, Motto of Northeastern University


 MACTE ANIMO! GENEROSE PUER SIC ITUR AD ASTRA ,,,,, Young, cheer up! This is the way to the skies. ,,,,, Motto of Academia da Força Aérea (Air Force Academy) of the Brazilian Air Force 

 MACTE VIRTUTE SIC ITUR AD ASTRA ,,,,, those who excel, thus reach the stars ,,,,, or "excellence is the way to the stars"; frequent motto; from Virgil's _Aeneid_ IX.641 (English, Dryden) 

 MAGISTER DIXIT ,,,,, the teacher has said it ,,,,, Canonical medieval reference to Aristotle, precluding further discussion 

 MAGISTER MEUS CHRISTUS ,,,,, Christ is my teacher ,,,,, common Catholic edict and motto of a Catholic private school, Andrean High School in Merrillville, Indiana 

 MAGNA CARTA ,,,,, Great Charter ,,,,, Set of documents from 1215 between Pope Innocent III, King John of England, and English barons. 

 MAGNA CUM LAUDE ,,,,, with great praise ,,,,, Common Latin honor, above _cum laude_ and below _summa cum laude_ 

 MAGNA DI CURANT, PARVA NEGLEGUNT ,,,,, The gods care about great matters, but they neglect small ones ,,,,, Cicero, _De Natura Deorum_ 2:167 

 MAGNA EST VIS CONSUETUDINIS ,,,,, great is the power of habit ,,,,, 

 MAGNA EUROPA EST PATRIA NOSTRA ,,,,, Greater Europe is Our Fatherland ,,,,, Political motto of pan-Europeanists 

 MAGNO CUM GAUDIO ,,,,, with great joy ,,,,, 

 MAGNUM OPUS ,,,,, great work ,,,,, Said of someone's masterpiece 

 MAGNUM VECTIGAL EST PARSIMONIA ,,,,, Economy is a great revenue ,,,,, Cicero, _Paradoxa_ 6/3:49. Sometimes translated into English as "thrift (or frugality) is a great revenue (or income)", edited from its original subordinate clause: "O di immortales! non intellegunt homines, quam _magnum vectigal sit parsimonia_." (English: O immortal gods! Men do not understand what a great revenue is thrift.) 

 MAIOR E LONGINQUO REVERENTIA ,,,,, greater reverence from afar ,,,,, When viewed from a distance, everything is beautiful. Tacitus, _Annales_ 1.47 

 MAIORA PREMUNT ,,,,, greater things are pressing ,,,,, Used to indicate that it is the moment to address more important, urgent, issues. 

 MALA FIDE ,,,,, in bad faith ,,,,, Said of an act done with knowledge of its illegality, or with intention to defraud or mislead someone. Opposite of _bona fide_. 

 MALA IPSA NOVA ,,,,, Bad News Itself ,,,,, Motto of the inactive 495th Fighter Squadron, US Air Force 

 MALA TEMPORA CURRUNT ,,,,, bad times are upon us ,,,,, Also used ironically, e.g.: New teachers know all tricks used by pupils to copy from classmates? Oh, mala tempora currunt!. 

 MALE CAPTUS BENE DETENTUS ,,,,, wrongly captured, properly detained ,,,,, An illegal arrest will not prejudice the subsequent detention/trial_._ 

 MALO MORI QUAM FOEDARI ,,,,, Death rather than dishonour ,,,,, Motto of the inactive 34th Battalion (Australia), the Drimnagh Castle Secondary School 

 MALO PERICULOSAM LIBERTATEM QUAM QUIETUM SERVITIUM ,,,,, I prefer liberty with danger to peace with slavery ,,,,, attributed to the Count Palatine of Posen before the Diet of Poland, cited in "The Social Contract or Principles of Political Right" by Jean Jacques Rousseau 

 MALUM DISCORDIAE ,,,,, apple of discord ,,,,, Alludes to the apple of Eris in the Judgement of Paris, the mythological cause of the Trojan War. It is also a pun based on the near-homonymous word _malum_ (evil). The word for "apple" has a long _ā_ vowel in Latin and the word for "evil" a short _a_ vowel, but they are normally written the same. 

 MALUM IN SE ,,,,, wrong in itself ,,,,, A legal term meaning that something is inherently wrong (cf. _malum prohibitum_). 

 MALUM PROHIBITUM ,,,,, wrong due to being prohibited ,,,,, A legal term meaning that something is only wrong because it is against the law. 

 MALUM QUO COMMUNIUS EO PEIUS ,,,,, the more common an evil is, the worse it is ,,,,, 

 MANU FORTE ,,,,, literally translated means 'with a strong hand', often quoted as 'by strength of hand' ,,,,, Motto of the Clan McKay 

 MANIBUS DATE LILIA PLENIS ,,,,, give lilies with full hands ,,,,, A phrase from Virgil's _Aeneid_, VI.883, mourning the death of Marcellus, Augustus' nephew. Quoted by Dante as he leaves Virgil in Purgatory, XXX.21, echoed by Walt Whitman in _Leaves of Grass_ III, 6. 

 MANU MILITARI ,,,,, with a military hand ,,,,, Using armed forces in order to achieve a goal 

 MANU PROPRIA (M.P.) ,,,,, with one's own hand ,,,,, With the implication of "signed by one's hand". Its abbreviated form is sometimes used at the end of typewritten or printed documents or official notices, directly following the name of the person(s) who "signed" the document exactly in those cases where there isn't an actual handwritten signature. 

 MANUS MANUM LAVAT ,,,,, one hand washes the other ,,,,, famous quote from _The Pumpkinification of Claudius_, ascribed to Seneca the Younger.^([68]) It implies that one situation helps the other. 

 MANUS MULTAE COR UNUM ,,,,, many hands, one heart ,,,,, Motto of the Alpha Delta Phi Fraternity. 

 MANUS NIGRA ,,,,, black hand ,,,,, 

 MARCET SINE ADVERSARIO VIRTUS ,,,,, valor becomes feeble without an opponent ,,,,, Seneca the Younger, _De Providentia_ 2:4. Also, translated into English as "[their] strength and courage droop without an antagonist" ("Of Providence" (1900) by Seneca, translated by Aubrey Stewart),^([69]) "without an adversary, prowess shrivels" (_Moral Essays_ (1928) by Seneca, translated by John W, Basore)^([70]) and "prowess withers without opposition". 

 MARE CLAUSUM ,,,,, closed sea ,,,,, In law, a sea under the jurisdiction of one nation and closed to all others. 

 MARE DITAT, ROSA DECORAT ,,,,, The sea enriches, the rose adorns ,,,,, Motto of Montrose, Angus and HMS _Montrose_ 

 MARE LIBERUM ,,,,, free sea ,,,,, In law, a sea open to international shipping navigation. 

 MARE NOSTRUM ,,,,, our sea ,,,,, A nickname given to the Mediterranean Sea during the height of the Roman Empire, as it encompassed the entire coastal basin. 

 MATER DEI ,,,,, Mother of God ,,,,, A name given to describe Mary, who gave birth to Jesus, who is also called the Son of God. 

 MATER FAMILIAS ,,,,, the mother of the family ,,,,, The female head of a family. See _pater familias_. 

 MATER SEMPER CERTA EST ,,,,, the mother is always certain ,,,,, a Roman-law principle which has the power of _praesumptio iuris et de iure_, meaning that no counter-evidence can be made against this principle (literally: Presumed there is no counter evidence and by the law). Its meaning is that the mother of the child is always known. 

 MATERIA MEDICA ,,,,, medical matter ,,,,, Branch of medical science concerned with the study of drugs used in the treatment of disease. Also, the drugs themselves. 

 MAXIMA DEBETUR PUERO REVERENTIA ,,,,, greatest deference is owed to the child ,,,,, from Juvenal's _Satires_ XIV:47 

 ME VEXAT PEDE ,,,,, it annoys me at the foot ,,,,, Less literally, "my foot itches". Refers to a trivial situation or person that is being a bother, possibly in the sense of wishing to kick that thing away or, such as the commonly used expressions, a "pebble in one's shoe" or "nipping at one's heels". 

 MEA CULPA ,,,,, through my fault ,,,,, Used in Christian prayers and confession to denote the inherently flawed nature of mankind; can also be extended to _mea maxima culpa_ (through my greatest fault). 

 MEA NAVIS AËRICUMBENS ANGUILLIS ABUNDAT ,,,,, My hovercraft is full of eels ,,,,, A relatively common recent Latinization inspired by the Dirty Hungarian Phrasebook sketch by Monty Python. 

 MEDIA VITA IN MORTE SUMUS ,,,,, In the midst of our lives we die ,,,,, A well-known sequence, falsely attributed to Notker during the Middle Ages. It was translated by Cranmer and became a part of the burial service in the funeral rites of the Anglican _Book of Common Prayer_. 

 MEDIOLANUM CAPTUM EST ,,,,, Milan has been captured ,,,,, Used erroneously as _Mediolanum Capta Est_ by the black metal band Mayhem as an album title. Mediolanum was an ancient city in present-day Milan, Italy. 

 MELIORA ,,,,, better things ,,,,, Carrying the connotation of "always better". The motto of the University of Rochester. 

 MELIORARE LEGEM MELIORARE VITAM EST ,,,,, To improve the law is to improve life. ,,,,, The motto of the Salem/Roanoke County, Virginia Bar Association. 

 MELIOREM LAPSA LOCAVIT ,,,,, He has planted one better than the one fallen. ,,,,, The motto of the Belmont County, Ohio, and the motto in the seal of the Northwest Territory 

 MELITA, DOMI ADSUM ,,,,, Honey, I'm home! ,,,,, A relatively common recent Latinization from the joke phrasebook _Latin for All Occasions_. Grammatically correct, but the phrase would be anachronistic in ancient Rome. 

 MEMENTO MORI ,,,,, remember that [you will] die ,,,,, remember your mortality 

 MEMENTO VIVERE ,,,,, remember to live ,,,,, 

 MEMINERUNT OMNIA AMANTES ,,,,, lovers remember all ,,,,, 

 MEMORES ACTI PRUDENTES FUTURI ,,,,, mindful of things done, aware of things to come ,,,,, Thus, both remembering the past and foreseeing the future. From the North Hertfordshire District Council coat of arms. 

 MEMORIAE SACRUM (M.S.) ,,,,, Sacred to the Memory (of ...) ,,,,, A common first line on 17th century English church monuments. The Latinized name of the deceased follows, in the genitive case. Alternatively it may be used as a heading, the inscription following being in English, for example: "_Memoriae Sacrum_. Here lies the body of ..." 

 MENS AGITAT MOLEM ,,,,, the mind moves the mass ,,,,, From Virgil. Motto of Newcastle University, Rossall School, the University of Oregon, the University of Warwick and the Eindhoven University of Technology. 

 MENS ET MANUS ,,,,, mind and hand ,,,,, Motto of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and also of the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine. 

 MENS REA ,,,,, guilty mind ,,,,, Also "culprit mind". A term used in discussing the mindset of an accused criminal. 

 MENS SANA IN CORPORE SANO ,,,,, a sound mind in a sound body ,,,,, Or "a sensible mind in a healthy body". Satire X of the Roman poet Juvenal (10.356) 

 METRI CAUSA ,,,,, for the sake of the metre ,,,,, Excusing flaws in poetry "for the sake of the metre" 

 MILES GLORIOSUS ,,,,, Glorious Soldier ,,,,, Or "Boastful Soldier". _Miles Gloriosus_ is the title of a play of Plautus. A stock character in comedy, the braggart soldier. (It is said that at Salamanca, there is a wall, on which graduates inscribe their names, where Francisco Franco had a plaque installed reading "Franciscus Francus Miles Gloriosus".) 

 MILES PRAESIDII LIBERTATIS ,,,,, Soldier of the Bastion of Freedom ,,,,, A phrase on the plaque in commemoration of Prof. Benjamin Marius Telders (nl), Academiegebouw Leiden (nl) (Netherlands). 

 MICTUS CRUENTUS ,,,,, bloody urine ,,,,, see hematuria 

 MINATUR INNOCENTIBUS QUI PARCIT NOCENTIBUS ,,,,, he threatens the innocent who spares the guilty ,,,,, 

 MIRABILE DICTU ,,,,, wonderful to tell ,,,,, Virgil 

 MIRABILE VISU ,,,,, wonderful to see ,,,,, A Roman phrase used to describe a wonderful event/happening. 

 MIRUM VIDETUR QUOD SIT FACTUM IAM DIU ,,,,, Does it seem wonderful [merely] because it was done a long time/so long ago? ,,,,, Livius Andronicus, _Aiax Mastigophorus_. 

 MISCERIQUE PROBAT POPULOS ET FOEDERA JUNGI ,,,,, He approves of the mingling of the peoples and their bonds of union ,,,,, Latin Aeneid of Virgil, Book IV, line 112, "he" referring to the great Roman god, who approved of the settlement of Romans in Africa. Old Motto of Trinidad and Tobago, and used in the novel A Bend in the River by V. S. Naipaul. 

 MISERA EST SERVITUS UBI JUS EST AUT INCOGNITUM AUT VAGUM ,,,,, miserable is that state of slavery in which the law is unknown or uncertain ,,,,, Quoted by Samuel Johnson in his paper for James Boswell on Vicious intromission. 

 MISERABILE VISU ,,,,, terrible to see ,,,,, A terrible happening or event. 

 MISERERE NOBIS ,,,,, have mercy upon us ,,,,, A phrase within the _Gloria in Excelsis Deo_ and the _Agnus Dei_, to be used at certain points in Christian religious ceremonies. 

 MISSIO DEI ,,,,, the Mission of God ,,,,, A theological phrase in the Christian religion. 

 MISSIT ME DOMINUS ,,,,, the Lord has sent me ,,,,, A phrase used by Jesus. 

 MITTIMUS ,,,,, we send ,,,,, A warrant of commitment to prison, or an instruction for a jailer to hold someone in prison. 

 MOBILIS IN MOBILI ,,,,, "moving in a moving thing" or, poetically, "changing through the changing medium" ,,,,, The motto of the _Nautilus_ from the Jules Verne novel _Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea_. 

 MODUS MORONS (Dog Latin) ,,,,, — ,,,,, Dog Latin based on wordplay with _modus ponens_ and _modus tollens_, referring to the common logical fallacy that _if P then Q_ and _not P_, then one can conclude _not Q_ (cf. denying the antecedent and contraposition). 

 MODUS OPERANDI (M.O.) ,,,,, method of operating ,,,,, Usually used to describe a criminal's methods. 

 MODUS PONENS ,,,,, method of placing ,,,,, Loosely "method of affirming", a logical rule of inference stating that from propositions _if P then Q_ and _P_, then one can conclude _Q_. 

 MODUS TOLLENS ,,,,, method of removing ,,,,, Loosely "method of denying", a logical rule of inference stating that from propositions _if P then Q_ and _not Q_, then one can conclude _not P_. 

 MODUS VIVENDI ,,,,, method of living ,,,,, An accommodation between disagreeing parties to allow life to go on. A practical compromise. 

 MONASTERIUM SINE LIBRIS EST SICUT CIVITAS SINE OPIBUS ,,,,, A monastery without books is like a city without wealth ,,,,, Used in the Umberto Eco novel _The Name of the Rose_. Part of a much larger phrase: Monasterium sine libris, est sicut civitas sine opibus, castrum sine numeris, coquina sine suppellectili, mensa sine cibis, hortus sine herbis, pratum sine floribus, arbor sine foliis. Translation: A monastery without books is like a city without wealth, a fortress without soldiers, a kitchen without utensils, a table without food, a garden without plants, a meadow without flowers, a tree without leaves. 

 MONTANI SEMPER LIBERI ,,,,, mountaineers [are] always free ,,,,, State motto of West Virginia, adopted in 1872. 

 MONTIS INSIGNIA CALPE ,,,,, Badge of the Rock of Gibraltar ,,,,, 

 MORE FERARUM ,,,,, like beasts ,,,,, used to describe any sexual act in the manner of beasts 

 MORE SUO ,,,,, in his/her/its/their usual way ,,,,, 

 MORIOR INVICTUS ,,,,, I die unvanquished^([71]) ,,,,, sometimes also translated as "death before defeat"^([71]) 

 MORITURI NOLUMUS MORI ,,,,, we who are about to die don't want to ,,,,, From Terry Pratchett's The Last Hero 

 MORITURI TE SALUTANT ,,,,, those who are about to die salute you ,,,,, Used once in Suetonius' _De Vita Caesarum_ 5, (_Divus Claudius_), chapter 21,^([72]) by the condemned prisoners manning galleys about to take part in a mock naval battle on Lake Fucinus in AD 52. Popular misconception ascribes it as a gladiator's salute. See also: Ave Imperator, morituri te salutant and Naumachia. 

 MORS CERTA, HORA INCERTA ,,,,, death is certain, its hour is uncertain ,,,,, 

 MORS MIHI LUCRUM ,,,,, death to me is reward ,,,,, A common epitaph, from St Paul's Epistle to the Philippians, 1:21 (_Mihi enim vivere Christus est et mori lucrum_, translated in the King James Bible as: "For to me to live is Christ and to die is gain") 

 MORS OMNIBUS ,,,,, death to all ,,,,, Signifies anger and depression. 

 MORS TUA, VITA MEA ,,,,, your death, my life ,,,,, From medieval Latin, it indicates that battle for survival, where your defeat is necessary for my victory, survival. 

 MORS VINCIT OMNIA ,,,,, "death conquers all" or "death always wins" ,,,,, An axiom often found on headstones. 

 MORTE MAGIS METUENDA SENECTUS ,,,,, old age should rather be feared than death ,,,,, from Juvenal in his _Satires_ 

 MORTUI VIVOS DOCENT ,,,,, The dead teach the living ,,,,, Used to justify dissections of human cadavers in order to understand the cause of death. 

 MORTUUM FLAGELLAS ,,,,, you are flogging a dead ,,,,, From Gerhard Gerhards' (1466–1536) [better known as Erasmus] collection of annotated Adagia (1508). Criticising one who will not be affected in any way by the criticism. 

 MOS MAIORUM ,,,,, the custom of our ancestors ,,,,, an unwritten code of laws and conduct, of the Romans. It institutionalized cultural traditions, societal mores, and general policies, as distinct from written laws. 

 MOTU PROPRIO ,,,,, on his own initiative ,,,,, Or "by his own accord." Identifies a class of papal documents, administrative papal bulls. 

 MULGERE HIRCUM ,,,,, to milk a male goat ,,,,, From Gerhard Gerhards' (1466–1536) [better known as Erasmus] collection of annotated Adagia (1508). Attempting the impossible. 

 MULIER EST HOMINIS CONFUSIO ,,,,, woman is man's ruin ,,,,, "Part of a comic definition of woman" from the Altercatio Hadriani Augusti et Secundi.^([73]) Famously quoted by Chauntecleer in Geoffrey Chaucer's _Canterbury Tales_. 

 MULTA PAUCIS ,,,,, Say much in few words ,,,,, 

 MULTIS E GENTIBUS VIRES ,,,,, from many peoples, strength ,,,,, Motto of Saskatchewan 

 MULTITUDO SAPIENTIUM SANITAS ORBIS ,,,,, a multitude of the wise is the health of the world ,,,,, From the Vulgate, Wisdom of Solomon 6:24. Motto of the University of Victoria. 

 MULTUM IN PARVO ,,,,, much in little ,,,,, Conciseness. The term "mipmap" is formed using the phrase's abbreviation "MIP"; motto of Rutland, a county in central England. Latin phrases are often _multum in parvo_, conveying much in few words. 

 MUNDUS SENESCIT ,,,,, the world grows old ,,,,, 

 MUNDUS VULT DECIPI ,,,,, the world wants to be deceived ,,,,, Ascribed to Roman satirist Petronius. Also in Augustine of Hippo's _De Civitate Dei contra Paganos_ (5th century AD), Sebastian Franck's _Paradoxa Ducenta Octoginta_ (1542), and in James Branch Cabell's 1921 novel _Figures of Earth_.^([74][75][76] [77]) 

 MUNDUS VULT DECIPI, ERGO DECIPIATUR ,,,,, the world wants to be deceived, so let it be deceived ,,,,, Ascribed to Roman satirist Petronius. Also in Augustine of Hippo's _De Civitate Dei contra Paganos_ (5th century AD) as "si mundus vult decipi, decipiatur" ("if the world will be gulled, let it be gulled"), and only the first part, "mundus vult decipi" ("the world wants to be deceived"), in Sebastian Franck's _Paradoxa Ducenta Octoginta_ (1542) and in James Branch Cabell's _Figures of Earth_ (1921).^([74][75][76] [77]) 

 MUNIT HAEC ET ALTERA VINCIT ,,,,, this one defends and the other one conquers ,,,,, Motto of Nova Scotia. 

 MUTATIS MUTANDIS ,,,,, after changing what needed to be changed ,,,,, "with the appropriate changes" 

 MUTATO NOMINE DE TE FABULA NARRATUR ,,,,, change but the name, and the story is told of yourself ,,,,, Horace, _Satires_, I. 1. 69. Preceded by _Quid rides?_ ("Why do you laugh?"; see Quid rides). 

 NANOS GIGANTUM HUMERIS INSIDENTES ,,,,, Dwarfs standing on the shoulders of giants ,,,,, First recorded by John of Salisbury in the twelfth century and attributed to Bernard of Chartres. Also commonly known by the letters of Isaac Newton: "If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants".


 NASCENTES MORIMUR FINISQUE AB ORIGINE PENDET ,,,,, When we are born we die, our end is but the pendant of our beginning ,,,,, 


 NASCITURUS PRO IAM NATO HABETUR, QUOTIENS DE COMMODIS EIUS AGITUR ,,,,, The unborn is deemed to have been born to the extent that his own inheritance is concerned ,,,,, Refers to a situation where an unborn child is deemed to be entitled to certain inheritance rights.


 NATURA ABHORRET A VACUO ,,,,, nature abhors vacuum ,,,,, Pseudo-explanation for why a liquid will climb up a tube to fill a vacuum, often given before the discovery of atmospheric pressure.


 NATURA ARTIS MAGISTRA ,,,,, Nature is the teacher of art ,,,,, The name of the zoo in the centre of Amsterdam; short: "Artis".


 NATURA NIHIL FRUSTRA FACIT ,,,,, nature does nothing in vain ,,,,, Cf. Aristotle: "οὐθὲν γάρ, ὡς φαμέν, μάτην ἡ φύσις ποιεῖ" (Politics I 2, 1253a9) and Leucippus: "Everything that happens does so for a reason and of necessity."


 NATURA NON CONTRISTATUR ,,,,, nature is not saddened ,,,,, That is, the natural world is not sentimental or compassionate. Derived by Arthur Schopenhauer from an earlier source.


 NATURA NON FACIT SALTUM ITA NEC LEX ,,,,, nature does not make a leap, thus neither does the law ,,,,, Shortened form of "_sicut natura nil facit per saltum ita nec lex_" (just as nature does nothing by a leap, so neither does the law), referring to both nature and the legal system moving gradually.


 NATURA NON FACIT SALTUS ,,,,, nature makes no leaps ,,,,, A famous aphorism of Carl Linnaeus stating that all organisms bear relationships on all sides, their forms changing gradually from one species to the next. From _Philosophia Botanica (1751)_.


 NATURA VALDE SIMPLEX EST ET SIBI CONSONA ,,,,, Nature is exceedingly simple and harmonious with itself ,,,,, Sir Isaac Newton's famous quote, defining foundation of all modern sciences. Can be found in his Unpublished Scientific Papers of Isaac Newton: A selection from the Portsmouth Collection in the University Library, Cambridge, 1978 edition^([78])


 NATURALIA NON SUNT TURPIA ,,,,, What is natural is not dirty ,,,,, Based on Servius' commentary on Virgil's _Georgics_ (3:96): "turpis non est quia per naturam venit."


 NATURAM EXPELLAS FURCA, TAMEN USQUE RECURRET. ,,,,, You may drive out Nature with a pitchfork, yet she still will hurry back ,,,,, You must take the basic nature of something into account.


 ,,,,, ,,,,, - Horace, _Epistles_, Book I, epistle X, line 24.


 NAVIGARE NECESSE EST, VIVERE NON EST NECESSE ,,,,, to sail is necessary; to live is not necessary ,,,,, Attributed by Plutarch to Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus, who, during a severe storm, commanded sailors to bring food from Africa to Rome. Translated from Plutarch's Greek "πλεῖν ἀνάγκη, ζῆν οὐκ ἀνάγκη".


 NE PLUS ULTRA ,,,,, nothing more beyond ,,,,, Also _nec plus ultra_ or _non plus ultra_. A descriptive phrase meaning the best or most extreme example of something. The Pillars of Hercules, for example, were literally the _nec plus ultra_ of the ancient Mediterranean world. Holy Roman Emperor Charles V's heraldic emblem reversed this idea, using a depiction of this phrase inscribed on the Pillars—as _plus ultra_, without the negation. The Boston Musical Instrument Company engraved _ne plus ultra_ on its instruments from 1869 to 1928 to signify that none were better. _Non..._ is the motto of the Spanish exclave Melilla.


 NE PUERO GLADIUM ,,,,, do not give a sword to a boy ,,,,, Never give dangerous tools to someone who is untrained to use them or too immature to understand the damage they can do.


 NE SUPRA CREPIDAM SUTOR IUDICARET ,,,,, a shoemaker should not judge beyond the shoe ,,,,, see Sutor, ne ultra crepidam


 NE TE QUAESIVERIS EXTRA ,,,,, do not seek outside yourself ,,,,, line from the Roman satirist Persius inscribed on the boulder to the right of Sir John Suckling in the painting of the aforementioned subject by Sir Anthony Van Dyck (ca. 1638) and invoked by Ralph Waldo Emerson at the opening of his essay Self-Reliance (1841)


 NEC ASPERA TERRENT ,,,,, They are not terrified of the rough things ,,,,, They are not afraid of difficulties. Less literally "Difficulties be damned." Motto for 27th Infantry Regiment (United States) and the Duke of Lancaster's Regiment. Nec = not; aspera = rough ones/things; terrent = they terrify / do terrify / are terrifying.


 NEC DEUS INTERSIT, NISI DIGNUS VINDICE NODUS (INCIDERIT) ,,,,, That a god not intervene, unless a knot show up that be worthy of such an untangler ,,,,, "When the miraculous power of God is necessary, let it be resorted to: when it is not necessary, let the ordinary means be used." From Horace's _Ars Poetica_ as a caution against _deus ex machina_.


 NEC DEXTRORSUM, NEC SINISTRORSUM ,,,,, Neither to the right nor to the left ,,,,, Do not get distracted. Motto for Bishop Cotton Boys' School and the Bishop Cotton Girls' School, both located in Bangalore, India.


 NEC SPE, NEC METU ,,,,, without hope, without fear ,,,,, 


 NEC TAMEN CONSUMEBATUR ,,,,, and yet it was not consumed ,,,,, Refers to the Burning Bush of Exodus 3:2. Motto of many Presbyterian churches throughout the world.


 NEC TEMERE NEC TIMIDE ,,,,, neither reckless nor timid ,,,,, Motto of the Dutch 11th Air Manoeuvre Brigade and the city of Gdańsk, Poland.


 NEC VI, NEC CLAM, NEC PRECARIO ,,,,, Without permission, without secrecy, without interruption ,,,,, The law of adverse possession.


 NECA EOS OMNES, DEUS SUOS AGNOSCET ,,,,, kill them all, God will know his own ,,,,, alternate rendition of _Caedite eos. Novit enim Dominus qui sunt eius_ by Arnaud Amalric.


 NECESSE EST AUT IMITERIS AUT ODERIS ,,,,, you must either imitate or loathe the world ,,,,, Seneca the Younger, _Epistulae morales ad Lucilium_, 7:7.


 NECESSITAS ETIAM TIMIDOS FORTES FACIT ,,,,, need makes even the timid brave ,,,,, Sallust, _The Conspiracy of Catiline_, 58:19


 NEMINE CONTRADICENTE (NEM. CON., N.C.D.) ,,,,, with no one speaking against ,,,,, Less literally, "without dissent". Used especially in committees, where a matter may be passed _nem. con._, or unanimously, or with unanimous consent.


 NEMO CONTRA DEUM NISI DEUS IPSE ,,,,, No one against God except God himself ,,,,, From Goethe's autobiography _From my Life: Poetry and Truth_, p. 598.


 NEMO DAT QUOD NON HABET ,,,,, no one gives what he does not have ,,,,, Thus, "none can pass better title than they have".


 NEMO EST SUPRA LEGEM ,,,,, nobody is above the law; or NEMO EST SUPRA LEGES, nobody is above the laws ,,,,, 


 NEMO IGITUR VIR MAGNUS SINE ALIQUO ADFLATU DIVINO UMQUAM FUIT ,,,,, No great man ever existed who did not enjoy some portion of divine inspiration ,,,,, From Cicero's _De Natura Deorum_, Book 2, chapter LXVI, 167^([79])


 NEMO IUDEX IN CAUSA SUA ,,,,, no man shall be a judge in his own cause ,,,,, Legal principle that no individual can preside over a hearing in which he holds a specific interest or bias.


 NEMO MALUS FELIX ,,,,, peace visits not the guilty mind ,,,,, Also translated to "no rest for the wicked." Refers to the inherent psychological issues that plague bad/guilty people.


 NEMO ME IMPUNE LACESSIT ,,,,, No one provokes me with impunity ,,,,, Motto of the Order of the Thistle, and consequently of Scotland, found stamped on the milled edge of certain British pound sterling coins. It is the motto of the Montressors in the Edgar Allan Poe short story "The Cask of Amontillado". Motto of the San Beda College Beta Sigma Fraternity.


 NEMO MORTALIUM OMNIBUS HORIS SAPIT ,,,,, No mortal is wise at all times ,,,,, The wisest may make mistakes.


 NEMO NISI PER AMICITIAM COGNOSCITUR ,,,,, No one learns except by friendship ,,,,, Used to imply that one must like a subject in order to study it.


 NEMO PROPHETA IN PATRIA (SUA) ,,,,, no man is a prophet in his own land ,,,,, Concept present in all four Gospels (Matthew 13:57; Mark 6:4; Luke 4:24; John 4:44).


 NEMO SALTAT SOBRIUS ,,,,, Nobody dances sober ,,,,, The short and more common form of _Nemo enim fere saltat sobrius, nisi forte insanit_, "Nobody dances sober, unless he happens to be insane," a quote from Cicero (from the speech Pro Murena).


 NEMO TENETUR SE IPSUM ACCUSARE ,,,,, no one is bound to accuse himself (the right to silence) ,,,,, A maxim banning mandatory self-incrimination. Near-synonymous with _accusare nemo se debet nisi coram Deo_. Similar phrases include: _nemo tenetur armare adversarium contra se_ (no one is bound to arm an opponent against himself), meaning that a defendant is not obligated to in any way assist the prosecutor to his own detriment; _nemo tenetur edere instrumenta contra se_ (no one is bound to produce documents against himself, meaning that a defendant is not obligated to provide materials to be used against himself (this is true in Roman law and has survived in modern criminal law, but no longer applies in modern civil law); and _nemo tenere prodere se ipsum_ (no one is bound to betray himself), meaning that a defendant is not obligated to testify against himself.


 NEQUE SEMPER ARCUM TENDIT APOLLO ,,,,, nor does Apollo always keep his bow drawn ,,,,, Horace, _Carmina_ 2/10:19-20. The same image appears in a fable of Phaedrus.


 NE QUID NIMIS ,,,,, Nothing in excess ,,,,, 


 NERVOS BELLI, PECUNIAM INFINITAM ,,,,, Endless money forms the sinews of war ,,,,, In war, it is essential to be able to purchase supplies and to pay troops (as Napoleon put it, "An army marches on its stomach").


 NIHIL AD REM ,,,,, nothing to do with the point ,,,,, That is, in law, irrelevant and/or inconsequential.


 NIHIL BONI SINE LABORE ,,,,, nothing achieved without hard work ,,,,, Motto of Palmerston North Boys' High School


 NIHIL DICIT ,,,,, he says nothing ,,,,, In law, a declination by a defendant to answer charges or put in a plea.


 NIHIL ENIM LACRIMA CITIUS ARESCIT ,,,,, nothing dries sooner than a tear ,,,,, Pseudo-Cicero, _Ad Herrenium_, 2/31:50


 NIHIL HUMANUM MIHI ALIENUM ,,,,, nothing human is alien to me ,,,,, Adapted from Terence's _Heauton Timorumenos_ (_The Self-Tormentor_), homo sum humani a me nihil alienum puto ("I am a human being; nothing human is strange to me"). Sometimes ending in est.


 NIHIL IN INTELLECTU NISI PRIUS IN SENSU ,,,,, nothing in the intellect unless first in sense ,,,,, The guiding principle of empiricism, and accepted in some form by Aristotle, Aquinas, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. Leibniz, however, added _nisi intellectus ipse_ (except the intellect itself).


 NIHIL NIMIS ,,,,, nothing too ,,,,, Or nothing to excess. Latin translation of the inscription of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi.


 NIHIL NOVI ,,,,, nothing of the new ,,,,, Or just "nothing new". The phrase exists in two versions: as _nihil novi sub sole_ (nothing new under the sun), from the Vulgate, and as _nihil novi nisi commune consensu_ (nothing new unless by the common consensus), a 1505 law of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and one of the cornerstones of its Golden Liberty.


 NIHIL OBSTAT ,,,,, nothing prevents ,,,,, A notation, usually on a title page, indicating that a Roman Catholic censor has reviewed the book and found nothing objectionable to faith or morals in its content. See also _imprimatur_.


 NIHIL SINE DEO ,,,,, nothing without God ,,,,, Motto of the Kingdom of Romania, while ruled by the Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen dynasty (1878–1947).


 NIHIL ULTRA ,,,,, nothing beyond ,,,,, Motto of St. Xavier's College, Calcutta


 NIL ADMIRARI ,,,,, be surprised at nothing ,,,,, Or "nihil admirari". Cicero, _Tusculanae Disputationes_ (3,30), Horace, _Epistulae_ (1,6,1), and Seneca, _Epistulae morales ad Lucilium_, (8,5). Motto of the Fitzgibbon family. See John FitzGibbon, 1st Earl of Clare


 NIL DESPERANDUM ,,,,, nothing must be despaired at ,,,,, That is, "never despair".


 NIL IGITUR FIERI DE NILO POSSE FATENDUMST ,,,,, nothing, therefore, we must confess, can be made from nothing ,,,,, From Lucretius' _De rerum natura_ (_On the Nature of Things_), I.205


 NIL IGITUR MORS EST AD NOS ,,,,, Death, therefore, is nothing to us ,,,,, From Lucretius' _De rerum natura_ (_On the Nature of Things_), III.831


 NIL MORTALIBUS ARDUI EST ,,,,, nothing is impossible for humankind ,,,,, From Horace's _Odes_. Motto of Rathkeale College, New Zealand and Brunts School, England.


 NIL NISI BONUM ,,,,, (about the dead say) nothing unless (it is) good ,,,,, Short for NIL NISI BONUM DE MORTUIS DICERE. That is, "Don't speak ill of anyone who has died". Also "Nil magnum nisi bonum" (nothing is great unless good), motto of St Catherine's School, Toorak, Pennant Hills High School and Petit Seminaire Higher Secondary School.


 NIL NISI MALIS TERRORI ,,,,, no terror, except to the bad ,,,,, Motto of The King's School, Macclesfield


 NIL PER OS, rarely NON PER OS (n.p.o.) ,,,,, nothing through the mouth ,,,,, Medical shorthand indicating that oral foods and fluids should be withheld from the patient.


 NIL SATIS NISI OPTIMUM ,,,,, nothing [is] enough unless [it is] the best ,,,,, Motto of Everton F.C., residents of Goodison Park, Liverpool.


 NIL SINE LABORE ,,,,, nothing without labour ,,,,, Motto of Fitzoy High School, Brisbane Grammar School, Brisbane Girls Grammar School, Greenwich Public School, Victoria School, Victoria Junior College, Baines High School, St Mungo's Academy and Heckmondwike Grammar School


 NIL SINE NUMINE ,,,,, nothing without the divine will ,,,,, Or "nothing without providence". State motto of Colorado, adopted in 1861. Probably derived from Virgil's _Aeneid_ Book II, line 777, "_non haec sine numine divum eveniunt_" (these things do not come to pass without the will of Heaven). See also _numen_.


 NIL VOLENTIBUS ARDUUM ,,,,, Nothing [is] arduous for the willing ,,,,, Nothing is impossible for the willing


 NISI DOMINUS FRUSTRA ,,,,, if not the Lord, [it is] in vain ,,,,, That is, "everything is in vain without God". Summarized from Psalm 127 (126 Vulgate), "_nisi Dominus aedificaverit domum in vanum laboraverunt qui aedificant eam nisi Dominus custodierit civitatem frustra vigilavit qui custodit_" (unless the Lord builds the house, they work on a useless thing who build it; unless the Lord guards the community, he keeps watch in vain who guards it). Motto of Edinburgh, St Thomas School, Kolkata, Welland Gouldsmith School, Kolkata, Union Secondary School Awkunanaw, Enugu, CMS Grammar School , Bariga Lagos and St. Stephen's Episcopal School, Calday Grange Grammar School, Wirral, England and Richmond College, Galle, Sri Lanka


 NISI PARIA NON PUGNANT ,,,,, it takes two to make a fight ,,,,, Irascetur aliquis: tu contra beneficiis prouoca; cadit statim simultas ab altera parte deserta; _nisi paria non pugnant_. (If any one is angry with you, meet his anger by returning benefits for it: a quarrel which is only taken up on one side falls to the ground: _it takes two men to fight_.) Seneca the Younger, _De Ira_ (On Anger): Book 2, cap. 34, line 5.


 NISI PRIUS ,,,,, unless previously ,,,,, In England, a direction that a case be brought up to Westminster for trial before a single judge and jury. In the United States, a court where civil actions are tried by a single judge sitting with a jury, as distinguished from an appellate court.


 NITIMUR IN VETITUM ,,,,, We strive for the forbidden ,,,,, From Ovid's _Amores_, III.4:17. It means that when we are denied of something, we will eagerly pursue the denied thing. Used by Friedrich Nietzsche in his _Ecce Homo_ to indicate that his philosophy pursues what is forbidden to other philosophers.


 NOBIS BENE, NEMINI MALE ,,,,, Good for us, Bad for no one ,,,,, Inscription on the old Nobistor (de) gatepost that divided Altona and St. Pauli


 NOLENS VOLENS ,,,,, unwilling, willing ,,,,, That is, "whether unwillingly or willingly". Sometimes rendered _volens nolens_, _aut nolens aut volens_ or _nolentis volentis_. Similar to _willy-nilly_, though that word is derived from Old English _will-he nil-he_ ([whether] he will or [whether] he will not).


 NOLI ME TANGERE ,,,,, do not touch me ,,,,, Commonly translated "touch me not". According to the Gospel of John, this was said by Jesus to Mary Magdalene after his resurrection.


 NOLI TURBARE CIRCULOS MEOS ,,,,, Do not disturb my circles! ,,,,, That is, "Don't upset my calculations!" Said by Archimedes to a Roman soldier who, despite having been given orders not to, killed Archimedes at the conquest of Syracuse, Sicily.


 NOLITE TE BASTARDES CARBORUNDORUM ,,,,, "Don't let the bastards grind you down ,,,,, From _The Handmaid's Tale_ by Margaret Atwood — the protagonist (Offred) finds the phrase inscribed on the inside of her wardrobe. One of many variants of Illegitimi non carborundum.


 (Dog Latin) ,,,,, ,,,,, 


 NOLLE PROSEQUI ,,,,, to be unwilling to prosecute ,,,,, A legal motion by a prosecutor or other plaintiff to drop legal charges, usually in exchange for a diversion program or out-of-court settlement.


 NOLO CONTENDERE ,,,,, I do not wish to contend ,,,,, That is, "no contest". A plea that can be entered on behalf of a defendant in a court that states that the accused doesn't admit guilt, but will accept punishment for a crime. _Nolo contendere_ pleas cannot be used as evidence in another trial.


 NOMEN AMICITIAE SIC, QUATENUS EXPEDIT, HAERET ,,,,, the name of friendship lasts just so long as it is profitable ,,,,, Petronius, _Satyricon_, 80.


 NOMEN DUBIUM ,,,,, doubtful name ,,,,, A scientific name of unknown or doubtful application.


 NOMEN EST OMEN ,,,,, the name is a sign ,,,,, Thus, "true to its name".


 NOMEN NESCIO (N.N.) ,,,,, I do not know the name ,,,,, Thus, the name or person in question is unknown.


 NOMEN NUDUM ,,,,, naked name ,,,,, A purported scientific name that does not fulfill the proper formal criteria and therefore cannot be used unless it is subsequently proposed correctly.


 NON AURO, SED FERRO, RECUPERANDA EST PATRIA ,,,,, Not gold, but iron redeems the native land ,,,,, According to some roman this sentence was said by Marcus Furius Camillus to Brennus, the chief of the Gauls, after he demanded more gold from the citizens of the recently sacked Rome in 390 BC.


 NON BENE PRO TOTO LIBERTAS VENDITUR AURO ,,,,, liberty is not well sold for all the gold ,,,,, Motto of Republic of Ragusa, inscribed over the gates of St. Lawrence Fortress. From Gualterus Anglicus's version of Aesop's fable "The Dog and the Wolf".


 NON BIS IN IDEM ,,,,, not twice in the same thing ,,,,, A legal principle forbidding double jeopardy.


 NON CANIMUS SURDIS, RESPONDENT OMNIA SILVAE ,,,,, we sing not to the deaf; the trees echo every word ,,,,, Virgil, _Eclogues_ 10:8


 NON CAUSA PRO CAUSA ,,,,, not the cause for the cause ,,,,, Also known as the "questionable cause" or "false cause". Refers to any logical fallacy where a cause is incorrectly identified.


 NON COMPOS MENTIS ,,,,, not in control of the mind ,,,,, See _compos mentis_. Also rendered _non compos sui_ (not in control of himself). Samuel Johnson, author of the first English dictionary, theorized that the word nincompoop may derive from this phrase.


 NON CONSTAT ,,,,, it is not certain ,,,,, Used to explain scientific phenomena and religious advocations, for example in medieval history, for rulers to issue a 'Non Constat' decree, banning the worship of a holy figure. In legal context, occasionally a backing for nulling information that was presented by an attorney. Without any tangible proof, Non constat information is difficult to argue for.


 NON DILIGERE DEUM, QUI MANDATA EIUS PARTICIPANDO CUM PERFIDIS NON CUSTODIT ,,,,, God does not love those who allow perfidy. ,,,,, Pope John VIII writing to Athanasius II, Bishop of Naples, regarding the overthrow of his elder brother the Duke of Naples.


 NON DUCOR, DUCO ,,,,, I am not led; I lead ,,,,, Motto of São Paulo city, Brazil. See also _pro Brasilia fiant eximia_.


 NON EST FACTUM ,,,,, it is not [my] deed ,,,,, a doctrine in contract law that allows a signing party to escape performance of the agreement. A claim of "non est factum" means that the signature on the contract was signed by mistake, without knowledge of its meaning, but was not done so negligently. A successful plea would make the contract void _ab initio_.


 NON EST PRINCEPS SUPER LEGES, SED LEGES SUPRA PRINCIPEM ,,,,, the prince is not above the laws, but the laws above the prince. ,,,,, Pliny the Younger, _Panegyricus_ 65:1.


 NON EXTINGUETUR ,,,,, shall not be extinguished ,,,,, Motto of the Society of Antiquaries of London accompanying their Lamp of knowledge emblem


 NON FACIAS MALUM UT INDE FIAT BONUM ,,,,, you should not make evil in order that good may be made from it ,,,,, More simply, "don't do wrong to do right". The direct opposite of the phrase "the ends justify the means".


 NON HOS QUAESITUM MUNUS IN USUS ,,,,, A gift sought for no such purpose ,,,,, Virgil, _Aeneid_, 4:647, of the sword with which Dido will commit suicide. "Not for so dire an enterprise design’d." (Dryden trans.; 1697)^([80]) "A gift asked for no use like this." (Mackail trans.; 1885).^([81]) "Ne'er given for an end so dire." (Taylor trans.; 1907)^([82]) "A gift not asked for use like this!" (Williams trans.; 1910).^([83]) Quoted by Francis Bacon of the civil law, "not made for the countries it governeth".


 NON IMPEDITI RATIONE COGITATIONIS ,,,,, unencumbered by the thought process ,,,,, motto of radio show _Car Talk_


 NON IN LEGENDO SED IN INTELLIGENDO LEGES CONSISTUNT ,,,,, the laws depend not on being read, but on being understood ,,,,, 


 NON LIQUET ,,,,, it is not proven ,,,,, Also "it is not clear" or "it is not evident". A sometimes controversial decision handed down by a judge when they feel that the law is not complete.


 NON LOQUI SED FACERE ,,,,, not talk but action ,,,,, Motto of the University of Western Australia's Engineering faculty student society.


 NON MIHI SOLUM ,,,,, not for myself alone ,,,,, Motto of Anderson Junior College, Singapore.


 NON MINISTRARI SED MINISTRARE ,,,,, not to be served, but to serve ,,,,, Motto of Wellesley College and Shimer College (from Matthew 20:28 in the Vulgate).


 NON MULTA SED MULTUM ,,,,, not quantity but quality ,,,,, Motto of the Daniel Pearl Magnet High School.


 NON NOBIS DOMINE ,,,,, Not to us (oh) Lord ,,,,, Christian hymn based on psalm 115.


 NON NOBIS NATI ,,,,, 'Born not for ourselves' ,,,,, Motto of St Albans School (Hertfordshire)


 NON NOBIS SOLUM ,,,,, not for ourselves alone ,,,,, Appears in Cicero's _De Officiis_ Book 1:22 in the form _non nobis solum nati sumus_ (we are not born for ourselves alone). Motto of Lower Canada College, Montreal and University College, Durham University, and Willamette University.


 NON NUMERANTUR, SED PONDERANTUR ,,,,, they are not counted, but weighed ,,,,, Old saying. Paul Erdős (1913–1996), in _The Man Who Loved Only Numbers_ by Paul Hoffman ^([84])


 NON OBSTANTE VEREDICTO ,,,,, not standing in the way of a verdict ,,,,, A judgment notwithstanding verdict, a legal motion asking the court to reverse the jury's verdict on the grounds that the jury could not have reached such a verdict reasonably.


 NON OLET ,,,,, it doesn't smell ,,,,, See _pecunia non olet_.


 NON OMNIA POSSUMUS OMNEST ,,,,, not everyone can do everything ,,,,, Virgil, _Eclogues_ 8:63 (and others).


 NON OMNIS MORIAR ,,,,, I shall not all die ,,,,, Horace, _Carmina_ 3/30:6. "Not all of me will die", a phrase expressing the belief that a part of the speaker will survive beyond death.


 NON PLUS ULTRA ,,,,, nothing further beyond ,,,,, the ultimate. See also 'ne plus ultra'


 NON POSSUMUS ,,,,, not possible ,,,,, 


 NON POSSUNT PRIMI ESSE OMNES OMNI IN TEMPORE ,,,,, not everyone can occupy the first rank forever ,,,,, (It is impossible always to excel) Decimus Laberius.


 NON PROGREDI EST REGREDI ,,,,, to not go forward is to go backward ,,,,, 


 NON PROSEQUITUR ,,,,, he does not proceed ,,,,, A judgment in favor of a defendant when the plaintiff failed to take the necessary steps in an action within the time allowed.


 NON SCHOLAE SED VITAE ,,,,, [We learn] not for school but for life ,,,,, An inversion of _non vitae sed scholae_ now used as a school motto


 NON QUI PARUM HABET, SET QUI PLUS CUPIT, PAUPER EST ,,,,, It is not he who has little, but he who wants more, who is the pauper. ,,,,, Seneca the Younger, _Epistulae morales ad Lucilium_, 2:6.


 NON QUIS SED QUID ,,,,, not who but what ,,,,, Used in the sense "what matters is not who says it but what he says" – a warning against ad hominem arguments; frequently used as motto, including that of Southwestern University.


 NON SEQUITUR ,,,,, it does not follow ,,,,, In general, a comment which is absurd due to not making sense in its context (rather than due to being inherently nonsensical or internally inconsistent), often used in humor. As a logical fallacy, a conclusion that does not follow from a premise.


 NON SERVIAM ,,,,, I will not serve ,,,,, Possibly derived from a Vulgate mistranslation of the Book of Jeremiah. Commonly used in literature as Satan's statement of disobedience to God, though in the original context the quote is attributed to Israel, not Satan.


 NON SIBI ,,,,, Not for self ,,,,, A slogan used by many schools and universities.


 NON SIBI, SED PATRIAE ,,,,, Not for self, but for country ,,,,, Engraved on the doors of the United States Naval Academy chapel; motto of the USS _Halyburton_ (FFG-40).


 NON SIBI, SED SUIS ,,,,, Not for one's self but for one's own ,,,,, A slogan used by many schools and universities.


 NON SIBI, SED OMNIBUS ,,,,, Not for one's self but for all ,,,,, A slogan used by many schools and universities.


 NON SIC DORMIT, SED VIGILAT ,,,,, Sleeps not but is awake ,,,,, Martin Luther on mortality of the soul.


 NON SILBA, SED ANTHAR; DEO VINDICE ,,,,, Not for self, but for others; God will vindicate ,,,,, A slogan used by the Ku Klux Klan


 NON SUM QUALIS ERAM ,,,,, I am not such as I was ,,,,, Or "I am not the kind of person I once was". Expresses a change in the speaker. Horace, _Odes_ 4/1:3.


 NON TENEAS AURUM TOTUM QUOD SPLENDET UT AURUM ,,,,, Do not hold as gold all that shines as gold ,,,,, Also, "All that glitters is not gold." Shakespeare in _The Merchant of Venice_.


 NON TIMEBO MALA ,,,,, I will fear no evil ,,,,, It is possibly a reference to Psalm 23. Printed on the Colt in _Supernatural_.


 NON VESTRA SED VOS ,,,,, Not yours but you ,,,,, Motto of St Chad's College, Durham.


 NON VITAE SED SCHOLAE ,,,,, [We learn] not for life but for schooltime ,,,,, From a passage of occupatio in Seneca the Younger's moral letters to Lucilius,^([85]) wherein Lucilius is given the argument that too much literature fails to prepare students for life


 NON VI, SED VERBO ,,,,, Not by force, but by the word [of God] ,,,,, From Martin Luther's "_Invocavit_ Sermons" preached in March, 1522, against the Zwickau prophets unrest in Wittenberg;^([86]) later echoed in the Augsburg Confession as _...sine vi humana, sed Verbo_: bishops should act "without human force, but through the Word".^([87])


 NOSCE TE IPSUM ,,,,, know thyself ,,,,, From Cicero, based on the Greek γνῶθι σεαυτόν (_gnothi seauton_), inscribed on the _pronaos_ of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, according to the Greek periegetic writer Pausanias (10.24.1). A non-traditional Latin rendering, _temet nosce_ (thine own self know), is translated in _The Matrix_ as "know thyself".


 NOSCITUR A SOCIIS ,,,,, a word is known by the company it keeps ,,,,, In statutory interpretation, when a word is ambiguous, its meaning may be determined by reference to the rest of the statute.


 NOSTER NOSTRI ,,,,, Literally "Our ours" ,,,,, Approximately "Our hearts beat as one."


 NOTA BENE (N.B.) ,,,,, mark well ,,,,, That is, "please note" or "note it well".


 NOVUS ORDO SECLORUM ,,,,, new order of the ages ,,,,, From Virgil. Motto on the Great Seal of the United States. Similar to _Novus Ordo Mundi_ (New World Order).


 NULLA DIES SINE LINEA ,,,,, Not a day without a line drawn ,,,,, Pliny the Elder attributes this maxim to Apelles, an ancient Greek artist.


 NULLA DIES UMQUAM MEMORI VOS EXIMET AEVO ,,,,, No day shall erase you from the memory of time ,,,,, From Virgil's _Aeneid_, Book IX, line 447, on the episode of Nisus and Euryalus.


 NULLA POENA SINE LEGE ,,,,, no penalty without a law ,,,,, Refers to the legal principle that one cannot be punished for doing something that is not prohibited by law, and is related to Nullum crimen, nulla poena sine praevia lege poenali.


 NULLA QUAESTIO ,,,,, there is no question, there is no issue ,,,,, 


 NULLA TENACI INVIA EST VIA ,,,,, For the tenacious, no road is impassable ,,,,, Motto of the Dutch car builder Spyker.


 NULLAM REM NATAM ,,,,, no thing born ,,,,, That is, "nothing". It has been theorized that this expression is the origin of Italian _nulla_, French _rien_, and Spanish and Portuguese _nada_, all with the same meaning.


 NULLI SECUNDUS ,,,,, second to none ,,,,, Motto of the Coldstream Guards and Nine Squadron Royal Australian Corps of Transport and the Pretoria Regiment.


 NULLIUS IN VERBA ,,,,, On the word of no man ,,,,, Motto of the Royal Society.


 NULLUM CRIMEN, NULLA POENA SINE PRAEVIA LEGE POENALI ,,,,, no crime, no punishment without a previous penal law ,,,,, Legal principle meaning that one cannot be penalised for doing something that is not prohibited by law; penal law cannot be enacted retroactively.


 NULLUM MAGNUM INGENIUM SINE MIXTURA DEMENTIAE FUIT ,,,,, There has been no great wisdom without an element of madness ,,,,, 


 NULLUM FUNUS SINE FIDULA ,,,,, No Funeral Without a Fiddle ,,,,, Motto of the Guild of Funerary Violinists.


 NUMEN LUMEN ,,,,, God our light ,,,,, The motto of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The motto of Elon University.


 NUMERUS CLAUSUS ,,,,, closed number ,,,,, A method to limit the number of students who may study at a university.


 NUNC AUT NUNQUAM ,,,,, now or never ,,,,, Motto of the Korps Commandotroepen, Dutch elite special forces.


 NUNC DIMITTIS ,,,,, now you send ,,,,, beginning of the Song of Simeon, from the Gospel of Luke.


 NUNC EST BIBENDUM ,,,,, now is the time to drink ,,,,, Carpe-Diem-type phrase from the Odes of Horace, _Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero pulsanda tellus_ (Now is the time to drink, now the time to dance footloose upon the earth).


 NUNC PRO TUNC ,,,,, now for then ,,,,, Something that has retroactive effect, is effective from an earlier date.


 NUNC SCIO QUID SIT AMOR ,,,,, now I know what love is ,,,,, From Virgil, _Eclogues_ VIII.


 NUNQUAM MINUS SOLUS QUAM CUM SOLUS ,,,,, never less alone than when alone ,,,,, 


 NUNQUAM NON PARATUS ,,,,, never unprepared, ever ready, always ready ,,,,, frequently used as motto


O DEUS EGO AMO TE ,,,,, O God I Love You ,,,,, attributed to Saint Francis Xavier


O FORTUNATOS NIMIUM SUA SI BONA NORINT, AGRICOLAS ,,,,, The farmers would count themselves lucky, if only they knew how good they had it ,,,,, from Virgil in The Georgics, 458


O HOMINES AD SERVITUTEM PARATOS ,,,,, Men ready to be slaves! ,,,,, attributed (in Tacitus, _Annales_, III, 65) to the Roman Emperor Tiberius, in disgust at the servile attitude of Roman senators; said of those who should be leaders but instead slavishly follow the lead of others


O TEMPORA, O MORES! ,,,,, Oh, the times! Oh, the morals! ,,,,, also translated "What times! What customs!"; from Cicero, _Catilina_ I, 2


OBEDIENTIA CIVIUM URBIS FELICITAS The obedience of the citizens ma,,,,, kes us a happy city ,,,,, Motto of Dublin


OBIIT (OB.) ,,,,, one died ,,,,, "He/she died", inscription on gravestones; ob. also sometimes stands for _obiter_ (in passing or incidentally)


OBIT ANUS, ABIT ONUS The old woman dies,,,,,, the burden is lifted ,,,,, Arthur Schopenhauer


OBITER DICTUM ,,,,, a thing said in passing ,,,,, in law, an observation by a judge on some point of law not directly relevant to the case before him, and thus neither requiring his decision nor serving as a precedent, but nevertheless of persuasive authority. In general, any comment, remark or observation made in passing


OBLITI PRIVATORUM, PUBLICA CURATE ,,,,, Forget private affairs, take care of public ones ,,,,, Roman political saying which reminds that common good should be given priority over private matters for any person having a responsibility in the State


OBSCURIS VERA INVOLVENS ,,,,, the truth being enveloped by obscure things ,,,,, from Virgil


OBSCURUM PER OBSCURIUS ,,,,, the obscure by means of the more obscure ,,,,, An explanation that is less clear than what it tries to explain; synonymous with ignotum per ignotius


OBTORTO COLLO ,,,,, with a twisted neck ,,,,, unwillingly


OCULUS DEXTER (O.D.) ,,,,, right eye ,,,,, Ophthalmologist shorthand


OCULUS SINISTER (O.S.) ,,,,, left eye ,,,,,


ODERINT DUM METUANT ,,,,, let them hate, so long as they fear ,,,,, favorite saying of Caligula, attributed originally to Lucius Accius, Roman tragic poet (170 BC); Motto of the Russian noble family Krasnitsky^([_citation\ needed_])


ODI ET AMO ,,,,, I hate and I love ,,,,, opening of Catullus 85; the entire poem reads, "_odi et amo quare id faciam fortasse requiris_ / _nescio sed fieri sentio et excrucior_" (I hate and I love. Why do I do this, you perhaps ask. / I do not know, but I feel it happening to me and I am burning up.)


ODI PROFANUM VULGUS ET ARCEO ,,,,, I hate the unholy rabble and keep them away ,,,,, from Horace


ODIUM THEOLOGICUM ,,,,, theological hatred ,,,,, name for the special hatred generated in theological disputes


OLEUM CAMINO ,,,,, (pour) oil on the fire ,,,,, from Erasmus' (1466–1536) collection of annotated _Adagia_


OMNE IGNOTUM PRO MAGNIFICO ,,,,, every unknown thing [is taken] for great ,,,,, or "everything unknown appears magnificent" The source is Tacitus: _Agricola_, Book 1, 30 where the sentence ends with 'est'. The quotation is found in Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes story 'The Red-Headed League' where the 'est' is missing.


OMNE INITIUM DIFFICILE EST ,,,,, every beginning is difficult ,,,,,


OMNE VIVUM EX OVO ,,,,, every living thing is from an egg ,,,,, foundational concept of modern biology, opposing the theory of


spontaneous generation


OMNES HOMINES SUNT ASINI VEL HOMINES ET ASINI SUNT ASINI ,,,,, All men are donkeys or men and donkeys are donkeys ,,,,, a sophismata proposed and solved by Albert of Saxony (philosopher)


OMNES VULNERANT, POSTUMA NECAT or OMNES FERIUNT, ULTIMA NECAT ,,,,, all [the hours] wound, last one kills ,,,,, usual in clocks, reminding the reader of death


OMNIA CUM DEO ,,,,, all with God ,,,,, motto for Mount Lilydale Mercy College, Lilydale, Victoria, Australia


OMNIA DICTA FORTIORA SI DICTA LATINA ,,,,, everything said [is] stronger if said in Latin ,,,,, or "everything sounds more impressive when said in Latin"; a more common phrase with the same meaning is _quidquid Latine dictum sit altum videtur_ (whatever said in Latin, seems profound)


OMNIA EXTARES! ,,,,, Interpreted as "Let it all hang out!", but in fact incorrect Latin construction with no real meaning^([88]) ,,,,, motto for The Evergreen State College, Olympia, Washington, USA^([89])


OMNIA IN MENSURA ET NUMERO ET PONDERE DISPOSUISTI ,,,,, Thou hast ordered all things in measure, and number, and weight. ,,,,, Book of Wisdom, 11:21


OMNIA MUTANTUR, NIHIL INTERIT ,,,,, everything changes, nothing perishes ,,,,, Ovid (43 BC – 17 AD), Metamorphoses, book XV, line 165


OMNIA OMNIBUS ,,,,, all things to all men ,,,,, 1 Corinthians 9:22


SI OMNIA FICTA ,,,,, if all (the words of poets) is fiction ,,,,, Ovid, Metamorphoses, book XIII, lines 733–4: "_si non omnia vates ficta_"


OMNIA VINCIT AMOR ,,,,, love conquers all ,,,,, Virgil (70 BC – 19 BC), Eclogue X, line 69


OMNIA MUNDA MUNDIS ,,,,, everything [is] pure to the pure [men] ,,,,, from The New Testament


OMNIA PRAESUMUNTUR LEGITIME FACTA DONEC PROBETUR IN CONTRARIUM ,,,,, all things are presumed to be lawfully done, until it is shown [to be] in the reverse ,,,,, in other words, "innocent until proven guilty"


OMNIS VIR ENIM SUI ,,,,, Every man for himself! ,,,,,


OMNIBUS IDEM ,,,,, the same to all ,,,,, motto of Pieter Corneliszoon Hooft, usually accompanied by a sun, which shines for (almost) everyone


OMNIBUS LOCIS FIT CAEDES ,,,,, There is slaughter everywhere (in every place) ,,,,, Julius Caesar's _The Gallic War_, 7.67


OMNIS TRADUCTOR TRADITOR ,,,,, every translator is a traitor ,,,,, every translation is a corruption of the original; the reader should take heed of unavoidable imperfections


OMNIS VIR TIGRIS ,,,,, everyone a tiger ,,,,, motto of the 102d Intelligence Wing


OMNIUM GATHERUM ,,,,, gathering of all ,,,,, miscellaneous collection or assortment; "gatherum" is English, and the term is used often used facetiously


ONUS PROBANDI ,,,,, burden of proof ,,,,, ONUS PROCEDENDI


burden of procedure ,,,,, burden of a party to adduce evidence that a case is an exception to the rule ,,,,, 


OPERA OMNIA ,,,,, all works ,,,,, collected works of an author


OPERA POSTHUMA ,,,,, posthumous works ,,,,, works published after the author's death


OPERARI SEQUITUR ESSE ,,,,, act of doing something follows the act of being ,,,,, scholastic phrase, used to explain that there is no possible act if there is not being: being is absolutely necessary for any other act


OPERE CITATO (OP. CIT.) ,,,,, in the work that was cited ,,,,, used in academic works when referring again to the last source mentioned or used


OPERE ET VERITATE ,,,,, in action and truth ,,,,, doing what you believe is morally right through everyday actions


OPERE LAUDATO (OP. LAUD.) ,,,,,   ,,,,, See _opere citato_


OPERIBUS ANTEIRE ,,,,, leading the way with deeds ,,,,, to speak with actions instead of words


OPHIDIA IN HERBA ,,,,, a snake in the grass ,,,,, any hidden danger or unknown risk


OPINIO JURIS SIVE NECESSITATIS ,,,,, an opinion of law or necessity ,,,,, a belief that an action was undertaken because it was a legal necessity; source of customary law


OPUS ANGLICANUM ,,,,, English work ,,,,, fine embroidery, especially used to describe church vestments


OPUS DEI ,,,,, The Work of God ,,,,, Catholic organisation


ORA ET LABORA ,,,,, pray and work ,,,,, This principle of the Benedictine monasteries reads in full: "Ora et labora (et lege), Deus adest sine mora." "Pray and work (and read), God is there without delay" (or to keep the rhyme: "Work and pray, and God is there without delay")


ORA PRO NOBIS ,,,,, pray for us ,,,,, "Sancta Maria, mater Dei, ora pro nobis pecatoribus"; Brazilian name for _Pereskia aculeata_


ORANDO LABORANDO ,,,,, by praying, by working ,,,,, motto of the Rugby School


ORATIO RECTA ,,,,, direct speech ,,,,, expressions from Latin grammar


ORATIO OBLIQUA ,,,,, indirect speech ,,,,,


ORBIS NON SUFFICIT ,,,,, the world does not suffice or the world is not enough ,,,,, from _Satires of Juvenal_ (Book IV/10), referring to Alexander the Great; James Bond's adopted family motto in the novel _On Her Majesty's Secret Service_; it made a brief appearance in the film adaptation of the same name and was later used as the title of the nineteenth James Bond film, _The World Is Not Enough_.


ORBIS UNUM ,,,,, one world ,,,,, seen in _The Legend of Zorro_


ORDO AB CHAO ,,,,, out of chaos, comes order ,,,,, one of the oldest mottos of Craft Freemasonry.^([90])


(OREMUS) PRO INVICEM ,,,,, (Let us pray), one for the other; let us pray for each other ,,,,, Popular salutation for Roman Catholic clergy at the beginning or ending of a letter or note. Usually abbreviated OPI. ("Oremus" used alone is just "let us pray").


ORTA RECENS QUAM PURA NITES ,,,,, newly risen, how brightly you shine ,,,,, Motto of New South Wales


 PACE ,,,,, Ablative form of peace ,,,,, "With all due respect to", "with due deference to", "by leave of", "no offence to", or "despite (with respect)". Used to politely acknowledge someone with whom the speaker or writer disagrees or finds irrelevant to the main argument. 

 PACE TUA ,,,,, with your peace ,,,,, Thus, "with your permission". 

 PACEM IN TERRIS ,,,,, Peace on Earth ,,,,, 

 PACTA SUNT SERVANDA ,,,,, agreements must be kept ,,,,, Also "contracts must be honoured". Indicates the binding power of treaties. 

 PALMA NON SINE PULVERE ,,,,, no reward without effort ,,,,, Also "dare to try"; motto of numerous schools. 

 PALMAM QUI MERUIT FERAT ,,,,, He who has earned the palm, let him bear it. ,,,,, Loosely, "achievement should be rewarded" (or, "let the symbol of victory go to him who has deserved it"); frequently used motto 

 PANEM ET CIRCENSES ,,,,, bread and circuses ,,,,, From Juvenal, _Satire X_, line 81. Originally described all that was needed for emperors to placate the Roman mob. Today used to describe any entertainment used to distract public attention from more important matters. 

 PARA BELLUM ,,,,, prepare for war ,,,,, From "Si vis pacem para bellum": _if you want peace, prepare for war_—if a country is ready for war, its enemies are less likely to attack. Usually used to support a policy of peace through strength (deterrence). In antiquity, however, the Romans viewed peace as the aftermath of successful conquest through war, so in this sense the proverb identifies war as the means through which peace will be achieved. 

 PARARE DOMINO PLEBEM PERFECTAM ,,,,, to prepare for God a perfect people ,,,,, motto of the St. Jean Baptiste High School 

 PARCE SEPULTO ,,,,, forgive the interred ,,,,, it is ungenerous to hold resentment toward the dead. Quote from the Aeneid, III 13-68. 

 PARENS PATRIAE ,,,,, parent of the nation ,,,,, A public policy requiring courts to protect the best interests of any child involved in a lawsuit. See also _Pater Patriae_. 

 PARI PASSU ,,,,, with equal step ,,,,, Thus, "moving together", "simultaneously", etc. 

 PARTURIUNT MONTES, NASCETUR RIDICULUS MUS ,,,,, The mountains are in labour, a ridiculous mouse will be born. ,,,,, said of works that promise much at the outset but yield little in the end (Horace, _Ars poetica_ 137) – see also The Mountain in Labour 

 PARUM LUCEAT ,,,,, It does not shine [being darkened by shade]. ,,,,, Quintilian, _Institutio Oratoria_, 1/6:34 – see also lucus a nonlucendo 

 PARVA SUB INGENTI ,,,,, the small under the huge ,,,,, Implies that the weak are under the protection of the strong, rather than that they are inferior. Motto of Prince Edward Island. 

 PARVIS IMBUTUS TENTABIS GRANDIA TUTUS ,,,,, When you are steeped in little things, you shall safely attempt great things. ,,,,, Motto of Barnard Castle School, sometimes translated as "Once you have accomplished small things, you may attempt great ones safely". 

 PASSIM ,,,,, here and there, everywhere ,,,,, Less literally, "throughout" or "frequently". Said of a word, fact or notion that occurs several times in a cited text. Also used in proofreading, where it refers to a change that is to be repeated everywhere needed. 

 PATER FAMILIAS ,,,,, father of the family ,,,,, Or "master of the house". The eldest male in a family, who held _patria potestas_ ("paternal power"). In Roman law, a father had enormous power over his children, wife, and slaves, though these rights dwindled over time. Derived from the phrase _pater familias_, an Old Latin expression preserving the archaic -_as_ ending for the genitive case. 

 PATER OMNIPOTENS ,,,,, Father Almighty ,,,,, A more direct translation would be "omnipotent father". 

 PATER PATRIAE ,,,,, father of the nation ,,,,, Also rendered with the gender-neutral _parens patriae_ ("parent of the nation"). 

 PATER PECCAVI ,,,,, father, I have sinned ,,,,, The traditional beginning of a Roman Catholic confession. 

 PAUCA SED BONA ,,,,, few, but good ,,,,, Similar to "quality over quantity"; though there may be few of something, at least they are of good quality. 

 PAUCA SED MATURA ,,,,, few, but ripe ,,,,, Said to be one of Carl Gauss's favorite quotations. Used in _The King and I_ by Rodgers and Hammerstein. 

 PAULATIM ERGO CERTE ,,,,, slowly therefore surely ,,,,, Former motto of Latymer Upper School in London (the text _latim er_ is concealed in the words) 

 PAX AETERNA ,,,,, eternal peace ,,,,, A common epitaph 

 PAX AMERICANA ,,,,, American Peace ,,,,, A euphemism for the United States of America and its sphere of influence. Adapted from _Pax Romana_. 

 PAX BRITANNICA ,,,,, British Peace ,,,,, A euphemism for the British Empire. Adapted from _Pax Romana_ 

 PAX CHRISTI ,,,,, Peace of Christ ,,,,, Used as a wish before the Holy Communion in the Catholic Mass, also the name of the peace movement Pax Christi 

 PAX DEI ,,,,, peace of God ,,,,, Used in the Peace and Truce of God movement in 10th-century France 

 PAX DEORUM ,,,,, Peace of the gods ,,,,, Like the vast majority of inhabitants of the ancient world, the Romans practiced pagan rituals, believing it important to achieve a state of _Pax Deorum_ (The Peace of the gods) instead of _Ira Deorum_ (The Wrath of the gods). 

 PAX DOMINE ,,,,, peace, lord ,,,,, lord or master; used as a form of address when speaking to clergy or educated professionals 

 PAX ET BONUM ,,,,, peace and the good ,,,,, Motto of St. Francis of Assisi and, consequently, of his monastery in Assisi; understood by Catholics to mean 'Peace and Goodness be with you,' as is similar in the Mass; translated in Italian as _pace e bene_. 

 PAX ET JUSTITIA ,,,,, peace and justice ,,,,, Motto of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 

 PAX ET LUX ,,,,, peace and light ,,,,, Motto of Tufts University and various schools 

 PAX EUROPAEA ,,,,, European peace ,,,,, euphemism for Europe after World War II 

 PAX HISPANICA ,,,,, Spanish Peace ,,,,, Euphemism for the Spanish Empire; specifically can mean the twenty-three years of supreme Spanish dominance in Europe (approximately 1598–1621). Adapted from _Pax Romana_. 

 PAX IN TERRA ,,,,, peace on earth ,,,,, Used to exemplify the desired state of peace on earth 

 PAX INTRANTIBUS, SALUS EXEUNTIBUS ,,,,, Peace to those who enter, health to those who depart. ,,,,, Used as an inscription over the entrance of buildings (especially homes, monasteries, inns). Often _benedicto habitantibus_ (Blessings on those who abide here) is added. 

 PAX MATRUM, ERGO PAX FAMILIARUM ,,,,, peace of mothers, therefore peace of families ,,,,, If the mother is peaceful, then the family is peaceful. The inverse of the Southern United States saying, "If mama ain't happy, ain't nobody happy." 

 PAX MONGOLICA ,,,,, Mongolian Peace ,,,,, period of peace and prosperity in Asia during the Mongol Empire 

 PAX OPTIMA RERUM ,,,,, peace is the greatest good ,,,,, Silius Italicus, _Punica_ (11,595); motto of the university of Kiel 

 PAX ROMANA ,,,,, Roman Peace ,,,,, period of relative prosperity and lack of conflict in the early Roman Empire 

 PAX SINICA ,,,,, Chinese Peace ,,,,, period of peace in East Asia during times of strong Chinese hegemony 

 PAX TECUM ,,,,, peace be with you (singular) ,,,,, 

 PAX TIBI, MARCE, EVANGELISTA MEUS. HIC REQUIESCET CORPUS TUUM. ,,,,, Peace to you, Mark, my Evangelist. Here will rest your body. ,,,,, ------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ------------- ------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ------------------- Legend states that when the evangelist w ent to the lagoon whe re Venice would later be founded, an angel came and said so.^([ 91]) The first part i s depicted as the not e in the book shown o pened by the lion of St Mark's Basilica, V enice; registered tra demark of the Assicur azioni Generali, Trie ste.^([92]) [Part o f Venice's coat of ar ms: a winged lion hol ding a sword upright and showing an opened book with the words: "Pax tibi, Marce, ev angelista meus."] ------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ------------- ------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ------------------- 

 PAX VOBISCUM ,,,,, peace [be] with you ,,,,, A common farewell. The "you" is plural ("you all"), so the phrase must be used when speaking to more than one person; _pax tecum_ is the form used when speaking to only one person. 

 PECCAVI ,,,,, I have sinned ,,,,, Telegraph message and pun from Charles Napier, British general, upon completely subjugating the Indian province of Sindh in 1842. This is, arguably, the most terse military despatch ever sent. The story is apocryphal. 

 PECUNIA NON OLET ,,,,, money doesn't smell ,,,,, According to Suetonius' _De vita Caesarum, when Emperor Vespasian was challenged by his son Titus for taxing the public lavatories, the emperor held up a coin before his son and asked whether it smelled or simply said_ non olet _("it doesn't smell"). From this, the phrase was expanded to_ pecunia non olet_, or rarely_ aes non olet _("copper doesn't smell")._ 

 PECUNIA, SI UTI SCIS, ANCILLA EST; SI NESCIS, DOMINA ,,,,, if you know how to use money, money is your slave; if you don't, money is your master ,,,,, Written on an old Latin tablet in downtown Verona (Italy). 

 PEDE POENA CLAUDO ,,,,, punishment comes limping ,,,,, That is, retribution comes slowly but surely. From Horace, _Odes_, 3, 2, 32. 

 PENDENT OPERA INTERRUPTA ,,,,, the work hangs interrupted ,,,,, From the _Aeneid_ of Virgil, Book IV 

 PER ,,,,, By, through, by means of ,,,,, See specific phrases below 

 PER ANGUSTA AD AUGUSTA ,,,,, through difficulties to greatness ,,,,, Joining sentence of the conspirators in the drama _Hernani_ by Victor Hugo (1830). The motto of numerous educational establishments. 

 PER ANNUM (PA.) ,,,,, each year ,,,,, Thus, "yearly"—occurring every year 

 PER ARDUA ,,,,, through adversity ,,,,, Motto of the British RAF Regiment 

 PER ARDUA AD ALTA ,,,,, through difficulty to heights ,,,,, Through hardship, great heights are reached; frequently used motto 

 PER ARDUA AD ASTRA ,,,,, through adversity to the stars ,,,,, Motto of the Royal, Royal Australian and Royal New Zealand Air Forces, the U. S. State of Kansas and of several schools. The phrase is used by Latin Poet Virgil in the Aeneid; also used in H. Rider Haggard's novel _The People of the Mist_. 

 PER ASPERA AD ASTRA ,,,,, through hardships to the stars ,,,,, From Seneca the Younger; frequently used motto, sometimes as _ad astra per aspera_ ("to the stars through hardships") 

 PER CAPITA ,,,,, by heads ,,,,, "Per head", i.e., "per person", a ratio by the number of persons. The singular is _per caput_. 

 PER CAPSULAM ,,,,, through the small box ,,,,, That is, "by letter" 

 PER CONTRA ,,,,, through the contrary ,,,,, Or "on the contrary" (cf. _a contrario_) 

 PER CRUCEM VINCEMUS ,,,,, through the cross we shall conquer ,,,,, Motto of St John Fisher Catholic High School, Dewsbury 

 PER CRUCEM CRESCENS ,,,,, through the cross, growth ,,,,, Motto of _Lambda Chi Alpha_ 

 PER CURIAM ,,,,, through the senate ,,,,, Legal term meaning "by the court", as in a _per curiam_ decision 

 PER DEFINITIONEM ,,,,, through the definition ,,,,, Thus, "by definition" 

 PER DIEM (PD.) ,,,,, by day ,,,,, Thus, "per day". A specific amount of money an organization allows an individual to spend per day, typically for travel expenses. 

 PER FAS ET NEFAS ,,,,, through right or wrong ,,,,, By fair means or foul 

 PER FIDEM INTREPIDUS ,,,,, fearless through faith ,,,,, 

 PER LITERAS REGIAS per lit. reg. per regias literas per reg. lit. &c. ,,,,, by royal letters ,,,,, by letters patent; of academic degrees: awarded by letters patent from the King/Queen, rather than by a University^([93][94]) 

 PER MARE PER TERRAM ,,,,, by sea and by land ,,,,, Motto of the Royal Marines and (with small difference) of Clan Donald and the Compagnies Franches de la Marine 

 PER MENSEM (PM.) ,,,,, by month ,,,,, Thus, "per month", or "monthly" 

 PER OS (P.O.) ,,,,, through the mouth ,,,,, Medical shorthand for "by mouth" 

 PER PEDES ,,,,, by feet ,,,,, Used of a certain place can be traversed or reached by foot, or to indicate that one is travelling by foot as opposed to by a vehicle 

 PER PROCURA (P.P.) _or_ (PER PRO) ,,,,, through the agency ,,,,, Also rendered _per procurationem_. Used to indicate that a person is signing a document on behalf of another person. Correctly placed before the name of the person signing, but often placed before the name of the person on whose behalf the document is signed, sometimes through incorrect translation of the alternative abbreviation per pro. as "for and on behalf of". 

 PER QUOD ,,,,, by reason of which ,,,,, In a UK legal context: "by reason of which" (as opposed to _per se_ which requires no reasoning). In American jurisprudence often refers to a spouse's claim for loss of consortium. 

 PER RECTUM (pr) ,,,,, through the rectum ,,,,, Medical shorthand; see also _per os_ 

 PER RECTUM AD ASTRA ,,,,, via rectum to the stars ,,,,, a modern parody of per aspera ad astra, originating and most commonly used in Russia, meaning that the path to success took you through most undesirable and objectionable places or environments; or that a found solution to a complex problem is extremely convoluted. 

 PER RISUM MULTUM POTERIS COGNOSCERE STULTUM ,,,,, by excessive laughter one can recognise the fool ,,,,, 

 PER SE ,,,,, through itself ,,,,, Also "by itself" or "in itself". Without referring to anything else, intrinsically, taken without qualifications etc. A common example is negligence per se. See also _malum in se_. 

 PER STIRPES ,,,,, through the roots ,,,,, Used in wills to indicate that each "branch" of the testator's family should inherit equally. Contrasted with _per capita_. 

 PER UNITATEM VIS ,,,,, through unity, strength ,,,,, Motto of Texas A&M University Corps of Cadets 

 PER VERITATEM VIS ,,,,, through truth, strength ,,,,, Motto of Washington University in St. Louis 

 PER VOLAR SUNATA^([sic]) ,,,,, born to soar ,,,,, Frequently used motto; not from Latin but from Dante's _Purgatorio_, Canto XII, 95, the Italian phrase "per volar sù nata". 

 PERFER ET OBDURA; DOLOR HIC TIBI PRODERIT OLIM ,,,,, Be patient and tough; some day this pain will be useful to you. ,,,,, From Ovid, Amores, Book III, Elegy XI 

 PERICULUM IN MORA ,,,,, danger in delay ,,,,, 

 PERINDE AC [SI] CADAVER [ESSENT] ,,,,, [well-disciplined] like a corpse ,,,,, Phrase written by St. Ignatius of Loyola in his _Constitutiones Societatis Iesu_ (1954) 

 PERITA MANUS MENS EXCULTA ,,,,, skilled hand, cultivated mind ,,,,, Motto of RMIT University in Melbourne, Australia 

 PERGE SEQUAR ,,,,, advance, I follow ,,,,, from Virgil's _Aeneid_ IV 114; in Vergil's context: "proceed with your plan, I will do my part." 

 PERICULA LUDUS ,,,,, Danger is my pleasure ,,,,, Motto of the Foreign Legion Detachment in Mayotte 

 PERPETUUM MOBILE ,,,,, thing in perpetual motion ,,,,, A musical term; also used to refer to hypothetical perpetual motion machines 

 PERSEVERANTIA ET FIDE IN DEO ,,,,, Perseverance and Faith in God ,,,,, Motto of Bombay Scottish School, Mahim, India 

 PERSONA NON GRATA ,,,,, person not pleasing ,,,,, An unwelcome, unwanted or undesirable person. In diplomatic contexts, a person rejected by the host government. The reverse, _persona grata_ ("pleasing person"), is less common, and refers to a diplomat acceptable to the government of the country to which he is sent. 

 PETITIO PRINCIPII ,,,,, request of the beginning ,,,,, Begging the question, a logical fallacy in which a proposition to be proved is implicitly or explicitly assumed in one of the premises 

 PIA DESIDERIA ,,,,, pious longings ,,,,, Or "dutiful desires" 

 PIA FRAUS ,,,,, pious fraud ,,,,, Or "dutiful deceit". Expression from Ovid; used to describe deception which serves Church purposes 

 PIA MATER ,,,,, pious mother ,,,,, Or "tender mother". Translated into Latin from Arabic. The delicate innermost of the three membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord. 

 PIETATE ET DOCTRINA TUTA LIBERTAS ,,,,, Freedom is made safe through character and learning ,,,,, Motto of Dickinson College 

 PINXIT ,,,,, one painted ,,,,, Thus, "he painted this" or "she painted this". Formerly used on works of art, next to the artist's name. 

 PISCEM NATARE DOCES ,,,,, [you] teach a fish to swim ,,,,, Latin proverb, attributed by Erasmus in his _Adagia_ to Greek origin (Diogenianus, Ἰχθὺν νήχεσθαι διδάσκεις); corollary Chinese idiom (班門弄斧) 

 PLACET ,,,,, it pleases ,,,,, expression of assent 

 PLENUS VENTER NON STUDET LIBENTER ,,,,, A full belly does not like studying ,,,,, I.e., it is difficult to concentrate on mental tasks after a heavy meal. The following variant is also attested: PLENUS SI VENTER RENUIT STUDERE LIBENTER (the belly, when full, refuses to study willingly). 

 PLENUS VENTER FACILE DE IEIUNIIS DISPUTAT ,,,,, A full belly readily discusses fasting. ,,,,, Hieronymus, Epistulæ 58,2 

 PLURALIS MAJESTATIS ,,,,, plural of majesty ,,,,, The first-person plural pronoun when used by an important personage to refer to himself or herself; also known as the "royal _we_" 

 PLURALIS MODESTIAE ,,,,, plural of modesty ,,,,, 

 PLUS MINUSVE (P.M.V.) ,,,,, more or less ,,,,, Frequently found on Roman funerary inscriptions to denote that the age of a decedent is approximate 

 PLUS ULTRA ,,,,, further beyond ,,,,, National motto of Spain and a number of other institutions 

 POLLICE COMPRESSO FAVOR IUDICABATUR ,,,,, goodwill decided by compressed thumb ,,,,, Life was spared with a thumb tucked inside a closed fist, simulating a sheathed weapon. Conversely, a thumb up meant to unsheath your sword. 

 POLLICE VERSO ,,,,, with a turned thumb ,,,,, Used by Roman crowds to pass judgment on a defeated gladiator. The type of gesture used is uncertain. Also the name of a famous painting depicting gladiators by Jean-Léon Gérôme. 

 POLONIA RESTITUTA ,,,,, Rebirth of Poland ,,,,, 

 PONS ASINORUM ,,,,, bridge of asses ,,,,, Any obstacle that stupid people find hard to cross. Originally used of Euclid's Fifth Proposition in geometry. 

 PONTIFEX MAXIMUS ,,,,, Greatest High Priest ,,,,, Or "Supreme Pontiff". Originally an office in the Roman Republic, later a title held by Roman Emperors, and later a traditional epithet of the pope. The _pontifices_ were the most important priestly college of the religion in ancient Rome; their name is usually thought to derive from _pons facere_ ("to make a bridge"), which in turn is usually linked to their religious authority over the bridges of Rome, especially the Pons Sublicius. 

 POSSE COMITATUS ,,,,, force of the county ,,,,, ^([95]) Thus, to be able to be made into part of a retinue or force. In common law, a sheriff's right to compel people to assist law enforcement in unusual situations. 

 POSSUNT QUIA POSSE VIDENTUR ,,,,, They can because they think they can ,,,,, Inscription on the back of Putney medals, awarded to boat race winning Oxford blues. From Virgil's Aeneid Book V line 231. 

 POST AUT PROPTER ,,,,, after it or by means of it ,,,,, Causality between two phenomena is not established (cf. _post hoc, ergo propter hoc_) 

 POST CIBUM (P.C.) ,,,,, after food ,,,,, Medical shorthand for "after meals" (cf. _ante cibum_) 

 POST COITUM ,,,,, After sex ,,,,, After sexual intercourse 

 POST COITUM OMNE ANIMAL TRISTE EST SIVE GALLUS ET MULIER ,,,,, After sexual intercourse every animal is sad, except the cock (rooster) and the woman ,,,,, Or: _triste est omne animal post coitum, praeter mulierem gallumque_. Attributed to Galen of Pergamum.^([96]) 

 POST EVENTUM ,,,,, after the event ,,,,, Refers to an action or occurrence that takes place after the event that is being discussed (similar in meaning to POST FACTUM). More specifically, it may refer to a person who is recounting a event long after it took place, implying that details of the story may have changed over time. (Some sources attribute this expression to George Eliot.) 

 POST FACTUM ,,,,, after the fact ,,,,, Not to be confused with EX POST FACTO. 

 POST FESTUM ,,,,, after the feast ,,,,, Too late, or after the fact 

 POST HOC ERGO PROPTER HOC ,,,,, after this, therefore because of this ,,,,, A logical fallacy where one assumes that one thing happening after another thing means that the first thing caused the second. 

 POST MERIDIEM (P.M.) ,,,,, after midday ,,,,, The period from noon to midnight (cf. _ante meridiem_) 

 POST MORTEM (PM) ,,,,, after death ,,,,, Usually rendered _postmortem_. Not to be confused with _post meridiem_ 

 POST MORTEM AUCTORIS (P.M.A.) ,,,,, after the author's death ,,,,, The phrase is used in legal terminology in the context of intellectual property rights, especially copyright, which commonly lasts until a certain number of years after the author's death. 

 POST NUBILA PHOEBUS ,,,,, after the clouds, the sun ,,,,, Motto of the University of Zulia, Venezuela 

 POST NUBES LUX ,,,,, out of darkness, light ,,,,, Motto of Cranfield University 

 POST PRANDIAL ,,,,, after “late breakfast” ,,,,, Refers to the time after _any_ meal. Usually rendered _postprandial_. 

 POST SCRIPTUM (P.S.) ,,,,, after what has been written ,,,,, A postscript. Used to mark additions to a letter, after the signature. Can be extended to _post post scriptum_ (p.p.s.), etc. 

 POST TENEBRAS LUX, or POST TENEBRAS SPERO LUCEM ,,,,, after darkness, [I hope for] light ,,,,, from Vulgata, Job 17:12; frequently used motto 

 POSTERA CRESCAM LAUDE ,,,,, we grow in the esteem of future generations ,,,,, Motto of the University of Melbourne 

 POTEST SOLUM UNUM ,,,,, There can be only one ,,,,, Highlander 

 PRAEMIA VIRTUTIS HONORES ,,,,, honours are the rewards of virtue ,,,,,   

 PRAEMONITUS PRAEMUNITUS ,,,,, forewarned is forearmed ,,,,,   

 PRAESIS UT PROSIS NE UT IMPERES ,,,,, Lead in order to serve, not in order to rule. ,,,,, Motto of Lancaster Royal Grammar School 

 PRAETER LEGEM ,,,,, after the law ,,,,, Legal terminology, international law 

 PRAGA CAPUT REGNI ,,,,, Prague, Head of the Kingdom ,,,,, Motto of Prague from Middle Ages 

 PRAGA CAPUT REI PUBLICAE ,,,,, Prague, Head of the Republic ,,,,, Motto of Prague from 1991 

 PRAGA MATER URBIUM ,,,,, Prague, Mother of Cities ,,,,, Motto of Prague from 1927 

 PRAGA TOTIUS BOHEMIAE DOMINA ,,,,, Prague, the mistress of the whole of Bohemia ,,,,, Former motto of Prague 

 PRETIUM LABORUM NON VILE ,,,,, No mean reward for labour ,,,,, Motto of the Order of the Golden Fleece 

 PRETIUMQUE ET CAUSA LABORIS ,,,,, The prize and the cause of our labour ,,,,, Motto of Burnley Football Club; from Ovid's _Metamorphoses_, 4.739 (Latin)/English): "The Tale of Perseus and Andromeda": _resoluta catenis incedit virgo, pretiumque et causa laboris._ ("freed of her chains the virgin approaches, cause and reward of the enterprise.") 

 PRIMA FACIE ,,,,, at first sight ,,,,, Used to designate evidence in a trial which is suggestive, but not conclusive, of something (e.g., a person's guilt) 

 PRIMA LUCE ,,,,, at dawn ,,,,, Literally "at first light" 

 PRIMAS SUM: PRIMATUM NIL A ME ALIENUM PUTO ,,,,, I am a primate; nothing about primates is outside of my bailiwick ,,,,, A sentence by the American anthropologist Earnest Hooton and the slogan of primatologists and lovers of the primates. 

 PRIMUM MOBILE ,,,,, first moving thing ,,,,, Or "first thing able to be moved"; see _primum movens_ 

 PRIMUM MOVENS ,,,,, prime mover ,,,,, Or "first moving one". A common theological term, such as in the cosmological argument, based on the assumption that God was the first entity to "move" or "cause" anything. Aristotle was one of the first philosophers to discuss the "uncaused cause", a hypothetical originator—and violator—of causality. 

 PRIMUM NON NOCERE ,,,,, first, to not harm ,,,,, A medical precept. Often falsely attributed to the Hippocratic Oath, though its true source is probably a paraphrase from Hippocrates' _Epidemics_, where he wrote, "Declare the past, diagnose the present, foretell the future; practice these acts. As to diseases, make a habit of two things: to help, or at least to do no harm." 

 PRIMUS INTER PARES ,,,,, first among equals ,,,,, Position of the Ecumenical Patriarch in the Eastern Orthodox Church, position of the President of the Swiss Confederation among the members of the Federal Council, and a title of the Roman Emperors (cf. _princeps_). 

 PRINCIPIA PROBANT NON PROBANTUR ,,,,, principles prove; they are not proved ,,,,, Fundamental principles require no proof; they are assumed _a priori_. 

 PRINCIPIIS OBSTA (ET RESPICE FINEM) ,,,,, resist the beginnings (and consider the end) ,,,,, Ovid, _Remedia Amoris_, 91 

 PRINCIPIUM INDIVIDUATIONIS ,,,,, Individuation ,,,,, psychological term: the self-formation of the personality into a coherent whole 

 PRIOR TEMPORE POTIOR IURE ,,,,, earlier in time, stronger in law ,,,,, A legal principle that older laws take precedence over newer ones. The inverse principle is known as _lex posterior_. 

 PRO ARIS ET FOCIS ,,,,, For God and country ,,,,, The motto of the Royal Queensland Regiment, and many other regiments. 

 PRO BONO PUBLICO ,,,,, for the public good ,,,,, Often abbreviated _pro bono_. Work undertaken voluntarily at no expense, such as public services. Often used of a lawyer's work that is not charged for. 

 PRO BRASILIA FIANT EXIMIA ,,,,, let exceptional things be made for Brazil ,,,,, Motto of São Paulo state, Brazil. 

 PRO DEO DOMO PATRIA ,,,,, For God, home and country ,,,,, Motto of the University of Mary Washington 

 PRO DEO ET PATRIA ,,,,, For God and Country ,,,,, Frequently used motto 

 PRO DOMO (SUA) ,,,,, for (one’s own) home or house ,,,,, serving the interests of a given perspective or for the benefit of a given group. 

 PRO ECCLESIA, PRO TEXANA ,,,,, For Church, For Texas ,,,,, Motto of Baylor University, a private Christian Baptist university in Waco, Texas. 

 PRO FIDE ET PATRIA ,,,,, for faith and fatherland ,,,,, Motto of the originally Irish Muldoon family and of several schools, such as the Diocesan College (Bishops) in Cape Town, South Africa, and All Hallows High School in the Bronx, New York. 

 PRO FORMA ,,,,, for form ,,,,, Or "as a matter of form". Prescribing a set form or procedure, or performed in a set manner. 

 PRO GLORIA ET PATRIA ,,,,, for glory and fatherland ,,,,, Motto of Prussia 

 PRO HAC VICE ,,,,, for this occasion ,,,,, Request of a state court to allow an out-of-state lawyer to represent a client. 

 PRO MULTIS ,,,,, for many ,,,,, It is part of the Rite of Consecration of the wine in Western Christianity tradition, as part of the Mass. 

 PRO PARTE ,,,,, in part ,,,,, Frequently used in taxonomy to refer to part of a group. 

 PRO PATRIA ,,,,, for country ,,,,, Pro Patria Medal: for operational service (minimum 55 days) in defence of the Republic South Africa or in the prevention or suppression of terrorism; issued for the Border War (counter-insurgency operations in South West Africa 1966–89) and for campaigns in Angola (1975–76 and 1987–88). Motto of The Royal Canadian Regiment, Royal South Australia Regiment, Hurlstone Agricultural High School. 

 PRO PATRIA VIGILANS ,,,,, watchful for the country ,,,,, Motto of the United States Army Signal Corps. 

 PRO PER ,,,,, for self ,,,,, to defend oneself in court without counsel; abbreviation of _propria persona_. See also: pro se. 

 PRO RATA ,,,,, for the rate ,,,,, i.e., proportionately. 

 PRO RE NATA (PRN, PRN) ,,,,, for a thing that has been born ,,,,, Medical shorthand for "as the occasion arises" or "as needed". Also "concerning a matter having come into being". Used to describe a meeting of a special Presbytery or Assembly called to discuss something new, and which was previously unforeseen (literally: "concerning a matter having been born"). 

 PRO REGE ET LEGE ,,,,, for king and the law ,,,,, Found on the Leeds coat of arms. 

 PRO REGE, LEGE ET GREGE ,,,,, for king, the law and the people ,,,,, Found on the coat of arms of Perth, Scotland. 

 PRO SE ,,,,, for oneself ,,,,, to defend oneself in court without counsel. Some jurisdictions prefer, "pro per". 

 PRO SCIENTIA ATQUE SAPIENTIA ,,,,, for knowledge and wisdom ,,,,, motto of Stuyvesant High School in New York City 

 PRO SCIENTIA ET PATRIA ,,,,, for science and nation ,,,,, motto of the National University of La Plata 

 PRO STUDIO ET LABORE ,,,,, for study and work ,,,,, 

 PRO TANTO ,,,,, for so much ,,,,, Denotes something that has only been partially fulfilled. A philosophical term indicating the acceptance of a theory or idea without fully accepting the explanation. 

 PRO TANTO QUID RETRIBUEMUS ,,,,, what shall we give in return for so much ,,,,, The motto of the city of Belfast; taken from the Vulgate translation of Psalm 116. 

 PRO TEMPORE ,,,,, for the time (being) ,,,,, Denotes a temporary current situation; abbreviated _pro tem_. 

 PROBATIO PENNAE ,,,,, testing of the pen ,,,,, Medieval Latin term for breaking in a new pen 

 PROBIS PATEO ,,,,, I am open for honest people ,,,,, Traditionally inscribed above a city gate or above the front entrance of a dwelling or place of learning. 

 PRODESSE QUAM CONSPICI ,,,,, To Accomplish Rather Than To Be Conspicuous ,,,,, motto of Miami University 

 PROPRIA MANU (P.M.) ,,,,, "by one's own hand" ,,,,, 

 PROPTER VITAM VIVENDI PERDERE CAUSAS ,,,,, to destroy the reasons for living for the sake of life ,,,,, That is, to squander life's purpose just in order to stay alive, and live a meaningless life. From Juvenal, _Satyricon_ VIII, verses 83–84. 

 PROTECTIO TRAHIT SUBJECTIONEM, ET SUBJECTIO PROTECTIONEM ,,,,, Protection draws allegiance, and allegiance draws protection ,,,,, Legal maxim, indicating that reciprocity of fealty with protection 

 PROVEHITO IN ALTUM ,,,,, launch forward into the deep ,,,,, motto of Memorial University of Newfoundland 

 PROXIME ACCESSIT ,,,,, he came next ,,,,, the runner-up 

 PROXIMO MENSE (PROX.) ,,,,, in the following month ,,,,, Used in formal correspondence to refer to the next month. Used with ult. ("last month") and inst. ("this month"). 

 PULCHRUM EST PAUCORUM HOMINUM ,,,,, Beauty is for the few ,,,,, from Friedrich Nietzsche's 1889 book _Twilight of the Idols_ 

 PULVIS ET UMBRA SUMUS ,,,,, we are dust and shadow ,,,,, From Horace, _Carmina_ book IV, 7, 16. 

 PUNCTUM SALIENS ,,,,, leaping point ,,,,, Thus, the essential or most notable point. The salient point. 

 PURIFICATUS NON CONSUMPTUS ,,,,, purified, not consumed ,,,,, 

 QUA DEFINITIONE ,,,,, by virtue of definition ,,,,, Thus: "by definition"; variant of per definitionem; sometimes used in German-speaking countries. Occasionally misrendered as "qua definitionem".


 QUA PATET ORBIS ,,,,, as far as the world extends ,,,,, Motto of the Royal Netherlands Marine Corps


 QUAE NON POSUISTI, NE TOLLAS ,,,,, do not take away what you did not put in place ,,,,, Plato, _Laws_


 QUAE NON PROSUNT SINGULA MULTA IUVANT ,,,,, what alone is not useful helps when accumulated ,,,,, Ovid, _Remedia amoris_


 QUAECUMQUE SUNT VERA ,,,,, whatsoever is true ,,,,, frequently used as motto; taken from Philippians 4:8 of the Bible


 QUAECUMQUE VERA DOCE ME ,,,,, teach me whatsoever is true ,,,,, motto of St. Joseph's College, Edmonton at the University of Alberta


 QUAERE ,,,,, to seek ,,,,, Or "you might ask..." Used to suggest doubt or to ask one to consider whether something is correct. Often introduces rhetorical or tangential questions.


 QUAERITE PRIMUM REGNUM DEI ,,,,, seek ye first the kingdom of God ,,,,, Also _quaerite primo regnum dei_; frequently used as motto


 QUALIS ARTIFEX PEREO ,,,,, As what kind of artist do I perish? ,,,,, Or "What a craftsman dies in me!" Attributed to Nero in Suetonius' _De vita Caesarum_


 QUALITAS POTENTIA NOSTRA ,,,,, Quality is our might ,,,,, motto of Finnish Air Force


 QUAM BENE NON QUANTUM ,,,,, how well, not how much ,,,,, motto of Mount Royal University, Calgary, Canada


 QUAM BENE VIVAS REFERRE (or _refert_), NON QUAM DIU ,,,,, it is how well you live that matters, not how long ,,,,, Seneca, _Epistulae morales ad Lucilium_ CI (101)


 QUAMDIU (SE) BENE GESSERIT ,,,,, as long as he shall have behaved well (legal Latin) ,,,,, I.e., "[while on] good behavior." So for example the Act of Settlement 1701 stipulated that judges' commissions are valid _quamdiu se bene gesserint_ (during good behaviour). (Notice the different singular, "gesserit", and plural, "gesserint", forms.) It was from this phrase that Frank Herbert extracted the name for the Bene Gesserit sisterhood in the _Dune_ novels.


 QUANTOCIUS QUANTOTIUS ,,,,, the sooner, the better ,,,,, or, as quickly as possible


 QUANTUM LIBET (Q.L.) ,,,,, as much as pleases ,,,,, medical shorthand for "as much as you wish"


 QUANTUM SUFFICIT (QS) ,,,,, as much as is enough ,,,,, medical shorthand for "as much as needed" or "as much as will suffice"


 QUAQUE HORA (QH) ,,,,, every hour ,,,,, medical shorthand; also _quaque die_ (qd), "every day", _quaque mane_ (qm), "every morning", and _quaque nocte_ (qn), "every night"


 QUARE CLAUSUM FREGIT ,,,,, wherefore he broke the close ,,,,, An action of trespass; thus called, by reason the writ demands the person summoned to answer to _wherefore he broke the close_ _(quare clausum fregit)_, i.e. why he committed such a trespass.


 QUATER IN DIE (QID) ,,,,, four times a day ,,,,, medical shorthand


 QUEM DEUS VULT PERDERE, DEMENTAT PRIUS ,,,,, Whom the gods would destroy, they first make insane ,,,,, 


 QUEM DI DILIGUNT ADULESCENS MORITUR ,,,,, he whom the gods love dies young ,,,,, Other translations of _diligunt_ include "prize especially" or "esteem". From Plautus, _Bacchides_, IV, 7, 18. In this comic play, a sarcastic servant says this to his aging master. The rest of the sentence reads: _dum valet sentit sapit_ ("while he is healthy, perceptive and wise").


 QUESTIO QUID IURIS ,,,,, I ask what law? ,,,,, from the Summoner's section of Chaucer's General Prologue to _The Canterbury Tales_, line 648


 QUI AUDET ADIPISCITUR ,,,,, Who Dares Wins ,,,,, The motto of the SAS , of the Britsh Army


 QUI BENE CANTAT BIS ORAT ,,,,, he who sings well praises twice ,,,,, from St. Augustine of Hippo's commentary on Psalm 73, verse 1: _Qui enim cantat laudem, non solum laudat, sed etiam hilariter laudat_ ("He who sings praises, not only praises, but praises joyfully")


 QUI BONO ,,,,, who with good ,,,,, common misspelling of the Latin phrase _cui bono_ ("who benefits?")


 QUI DOCET IN DOCTRINA ,,,,, he that teacheth, on teaching ,,,,, Motto of the University of Chester. The more literal translation is "Let those who teach, teach" or "Let the teacher teach".


 QUI HABET AURES AUDIENDI AUDIAT ,,,,, he who has ears to hear shall hear ,,,,, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear"; Mark Mark 4:9


 QUI ME TANGIT, VOCEM MEAM AUDIT ,,,,, who touches me, hears my voice ,,,,, common inscription on bells


 QUI TACET CONSENTIRE VIDETUR ,,,,, he who is silent is taken to agree ,,,,, Thus, silence gives consent. Sometimes accompanied by the proviso "_ubi loqui debuit ac potuit_", that is, "when he ought to have spoken and was able to".


 QUI TAM PRO DOMINO REGE QUAM PRO SE IPSO IN HAC PARTE SEQUITUR ,,,,, he who brings an action for the king as well as for himself ,,,,, Generally known as 'qui tam,' it is the technical legal term for the unique mechanism in the federal False Claims Act that allows persons and entities with evidence of fraud against federal programs or contracts to sue the wrongdoer on behalf of the Government.


 QUI TOTUM VULT TOTUM PERDIT ,,,,, he who wants everything loses everything ,,,,, Attributed to Publilius Syrus


 QUI TRANSTULIT SUSTINET ,,,,, he who transplanted still sustains ,,,,, Or "he who brought us across still supports us", meaning God. State motto of Connecticut. Originally written as _sustinet qui transtulit_ in 1639.


 QUIA SUAM UXOREM ETIAM SUSPICIONE VACARE VELLET ,,,,, because he should wish even his wife to be free from suspicion ,,,,, Attributed to Julius Caesar by Plutarch, _Caesar_ 10. Translated loosely as "because even the wife of Caesar may not be suspected". At the feast of Bona Dea, a sacred festival for females only, which was being held at the Domus Publica, the home of the Pontifex Maximus, Caesar, and hosted by his second wife, Pompeia, the notorious politician Clodius arrived in disguise. Caught by the outraged noblewomen, Clodius fled before they could kill him on the spot for sacrilege. In the ensuing trial, allegations arose that Pompeia and Clodius were having an affair, and while Caesar asserted that this was not the case and no substantial evidence arose suggesting otherwise, he nevertheless divorced, with this quotation as explanation.


 QUID AGIS ,,,,, What are you doing? ,,,,, What's happening? What's going on? What's the news? What's up?


 QUID EST VERITAS ,,,,, What is truth? ,,,,, In the Vulgate translation of John 18:38, Pilate's question to Jesus (Greek: Τί ἐστιν ἀλήθεια;). A possible answer is an anagram of the phrase: _est vir qui adest_, "it is the man who is here."


 QUID INFANTES SUMUS ,,,,, What are we, a bunch of babies? ,,,,, Commonly used by Nocera Clan. synonym - "to throw down ones gauntlet."


 QUID NOVI EX AFRICA ,,,,, What of the new out of Africa? ,,,,, less literally, "What's new from Africa?"; derived from an Aristotle quotation


 QUID NUNC ,,,,, What now? ,,,,, Commonly shortened to _quidnunc_. As a noun, a _quidnunc_ is a busybody or a gossip. Patrick Campbell worked for _The Irish Times_ under the pseudonym "Quidnunc".


 QUID PRO QUO ,,,,, what for what ,,,,, Commonly used in English, it is also translated as "this for that" or "a thing for a thing". Signifies a favor exchanged for a favor. The traditional Latin expression for this meaning was _do ut des_ ("I give, so that you may give").


 QUID RIDES? ,,,,, Why do you laugh? Change but the name, and the story is told of yourself. ,,,,, Horace, _Satires_, I. 1. 69.


 MUTATO NOMINE DE TE FABULA NARRATUR. ,,,,, ,,,,, 


 QUIDQUID LATINE DICTUM SIT ALTUM VIDETUR ,,,,, whatever has been said in Latin seems deep ,,,,, Or "anything said in Latin sounds profound". A recent ironic Latin phrase to poke fun at people who seem to use Latin phrases and quotations only to make themselves sound more important or "educated". Similar to the less common _omnia dicta fortiora si dicta Latina_.


 QUIETA NON MOVERE ,,,,, don't move settled things ,,,,, 


 QUIS CUSTODIET IPSOS CUSTODES? ,,,,, Who will guard the guards themselves? ,,,,, Commonly associated with Plato who in the _Republic_ poses this question; and from Juvenal's _On Women_, referring to the practice of having eunuchs guard women and beginning with the word _sed_ ("but"). Usually translated less literally, as "Who watches the watchmen?" This translation is a common epigraph, such as of the Tower Commission and Alan Moore's _Watchmen_ comic book series.


 QUIS LEGET HAEC? ,,,,, Who will read this? ,,,,, 


 QUIS SEPARABIT? ,,,,, Who will separate us? ,,,,, motto of Northern Ireland and of the Order of St Patrick


 QUIS UT DEUS ,,,,, Who [is] as God? ,,,,, Usually translated "Who is like unto God?" Questions who would have the audacity to compare himself to a Supreme Being. It is a translation of the Hebrew name 'Michael' = Mi cha El Who like God מי/כ/ אל Hebrew: מִיכָאֵל‎ (right to left).


 QUO ERRAT DEMONSTRATOR ,,,,, where the prover errs ,,,,, A pun on "quod erat demonstrandum"


 QUO FATA FERUNT ,,,,, where the fates bear us to ,,,,, motto of Bermuda


 QUOD VERUM TUTUM ,,,,, what is true is right ,,,,, motto of Spier's School


 QUOUSQUE TANDEM? ,,,,, For how much longer? ,,,,, From Cicero's first speech _In Catilinam_ to the Roman Senate regarding the conspiracy of Catiline: _Quo usque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra?_ ("For how much longer, Catiline, will you abuse our patience?").


 QUO VADIMUS? ,,,,, Where are we going? ,,,,, Title of the series finale of Aaron Sorkin's TV dramedy _Sports Night_


 QUO VADIS? ,,,,, Where are you going? ,,,,, According to Vulgate translation of John 13:36, Saint Peter asked Jesus _Domine, quo vadis_ ("Lord, where are you going?"). The King James Version has the translation "Lord, whither goest thou?"


 QUOCUNQUE JECERIS STABIT ,,,,, whithersoever you throw it, it will stand ,,,,, motto of the Isle of Man


 QUOD ABUNDAT NON OBSTAT ,,,,, what is abundant doesn't hinder ,,,,, It is no problem to have too much of something.


 QUOD CITO FIT, CITO PERIT ,,,,, what is done quickly, perishes quickly ,,,,, Things done in a hurry are more likely to fail and fail quicker than those done with care.


 QUOD ERAT DEMONSTRANDUM (Q.E.D.) ,,,,, what was to be demonstrated ,,,,, The abbreviation is often written at the bottom of a mathematical proof. Sometimes translated loosely into English as "The Five Ws", W.W.W.W.W., which stands for "Which Was What We Wanted".


 QUOD ERAT FACIENDUM (Q.E.F) ,,,,, which was to be done ,,,,, Or "which was to be constructed". Used in translations of Euclid's _Elements_ when there was nothing to prove, but there was something being constructed, for example a triangle with the same size as a given line.


 QUOD EST (Q.E.) ,,,,, which is ,,,,, 


 QUOD EST NECESSARIUM EST LICITUM ,,,,, what is necessary is lawful ,,,,, 


 QUOD GRATIS ASSERITUR, GRATIS NEGATUR ,,,,, what is asserted without reason may be denied without reason ,,,,, If no grounds have been given for an assertion, then there are no grounds needed to reject it.


 QUOD LICET IOVI, NON LICET BOVI ,,,,, what is permitted to Jupiter is not permitted to an ox ,,,,, If an important person does something, it does not necessarily mean that everyone can do it (cf. double standard). _Iovi_ (also commonly rendered _Jovi_) is the dative form of _Iuppiter_ ("Jupiter" or "Jove"), the chief god of the Romans.


 QUOD ME NUTRIT ME DESTRUIT ,,,,, what nourishes me destroys me ,,,,, Thought to have originated with Elizabethan playwright Christopher Marlowe. Generally interpreted to mean that that which motivates or drives a person can consume him or her from within. This phrase has become a popular slogan or motto for pro-ana websites, anorexics and bulimics.


 QUOD NATURA NON DAT SALMANTICA NON PRAESTAT ,,,,, what nature does not give, Salamanca does not provide ,,,,, Refers to the Spanish _University of Salamanca_, meaning that education cannot substitute the lack of brains.


 QUOD NON FECERUNT BARBARI, FECERUNT BARBERINI ,,,,, What the barbarians did not do, the Barberini did ,,,,, A well-known satirical lampoon left attached to the ancient "speaking" statue of Pasquino on a corner of the Piazza Navona in Rome, Italy.^([97])


 QUOD PERIIT, PERIIT ,,,,, What is gone is gone ,,,,, What has happened has happened and it cannot be changed, thus we should look forward into the future instead of being pulled by the past.


 QUOD SCRIPSI, SCRIPSI ,,,,, What I have written I have written. ,,,,, Pilate to the chief priests (John 19:22)


 QUOD SUPPLANTANDUM, PRIUS BENE SCIENDUM ,,,,, Whatever you hope to supplant, you will first know thoroughly ,,,,, i.e. "You must thoroughly understand that which you hope to supplant". A caution against following a doctrine of Naive Analogy when attempting to formulate a scientific hypothesis.


 QUOD VIDE (Q.V.) ,,,,, which see ,,,,, Used after a term, phrase, or topic that should be looked up elsewhere in the current document, book, etc. For more than one term or phrase, the plural is _quae vide_ (qq.v.).


 QUODCUMQUE DIXERIT VOBIS, FACITE. ,,,,, Whatever He tells you, that you shall do. ,,,,, More colloquially: "Do whatever He [Jesus] tells you to do." Instructions of Mary to the servants at the Wedding at Cana. (John 2:5). Also the motto of East Catholic High School.


 QUOMODO VALES ,,,,, How are you? ,,,,, 


 QUORUM ,,,,, of whom ,,,,, the number of members whose presence is required under the rules to make any given meeting constitutional


 QUOS AMOR VERUS TENUIT TENEBIT ,,,,, Those whom true love has held, it will go on holding ,,,,, Seneca


 QUOT CAPITA TOT SENSUS ,,,,, as many heads, so many opinions ,,,,, "There are as many opinions as there are heads" – Terence


 QUOT HOMINES TOT SENTENTIAE ,,,,, every man had his sentence ,,,,, Or "there are as many opinions as there are people", "how many people, so many opinions"


 RADIX MALORUM EST CUPIDITAS ,,,,, the root of evils is desire ,,,,, Or "greed is the root of all evil". Theme of "The Pardoner's Tale" from _The Canterbury Tales_.


 RARA AVIS (_rarissima avis_) ,,,,, rare bird (very rare bird) ,,,,, An extraordinary or unusual thing. From Juvenal's _Satires_: _rara avis in terris nigroque simillima cygno_ ("a rare bird in the lands, and very like a black swan").


 RARI NANTES IN GURGITE VASTO ,,,,, Rare survivors in the immense sea ,,,,, Virgil, _Aeneid_, I, 118


 RATIO DECIDENDI ,,,,, reasoning for the decision ,,,,, The legal, moral, political, and social principles used by a court to compose a judgment's rationale.


 RATIO LEGIS ,,,,, reasoning of law ,,,,, A law's foundation or basis.


 RATIONE PERSONAE ,,,,, by reason of his/her person ,,,,, Also "Jurisdiction Ratione Personae" the personal reach of the courts jurisdiction.^([98])


 RATIONE SOLI ,,,,, by account of the ground ,,,,, Or "according to the soil". Assigning property rights to a thing based on its presence on a landowner's property.


 RATUM ET CONSUMMATUM ,,,,, confirmed and completed ,,,,, in Canon law, a consummated marriage


 RATUM TANTUM ,,,,, confirmed only ,,,,, in Canon law, a confirmed but unconsummated marriage (which can be dissolved _super rato_)


 RE ,,,,, [in] the matter of ,,,,, More literally, "by the thing". From the ablative of _res_ ("thing" or "circumstance"). It is a common misconception that the "Re:" in correspondence is an abbreviation for _regarding_ or _reply_; this is not the case for traditional letters. However, when used in an e-mail subject, there is evidence that it functions as an abbreviation of _regarding_ rather than the Latin word for _thing_. The use of Latin _re_, in the sense of "about, concerning", is English usage.


 REBUS SIC STANTIBUS ,,,,, with matters standing thus ,,,,, The doctrine that treaty obligations hold only as long as the fundamental conditions and expectations that existed at the time of their creation hold.


 RECTE ET FORTITER ,,,,, Upright and Strong ,,,,, Motto of Homebush Boys High School


 RECTE ET FIDELITER ,,,,, Upright and Faithful ,,,,, Also "just and faithful" and "accurately and faithfully". Motto of Ruyton Girls' School


 REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM ,,,,, leading back to the absurd ,,,,, A common debate technique, and a method of proof in mathematics and philosophy, that proves the thesis by showing that its opposite is absurd or logically untenable. In general usage outside mathematics and philosophy, a _reductio ad absurdum_ is a tactic in which the logic of an argument is challenged by reducing the concept to its most absurd extreme. Translated from Aristotle's "ἡ εις άτοπον απαγωγη" (_hi eis atopon apagogi_, "reduction to the impossible").


 REDUCTIO AD HITLERUM ,,,,, leading back to Hitler ,,,,, A term coined by German-American political philosopher Leo Strauss to humorously describe a fallacious argument that compares an opponent's views to those held by Adolf Hitler or the Nazi Party. Derived from _reductio ad absurdum_.


 REDUCTIO AD INFINITUM ,,,,, leading back to the infinite ,,,,, An argument that creates an infinite series of causes that does not seem to have a beginning. As a fallacy, it rests upon Aristotle's notion that all things must have a cause, but that all series of causes must have a sufficient cause, that is, an unmoved mover. An argument which does not seem to have such a beginning becomes difficult to imagine. If it can be established, separately, that the chain must have a start, then a reductio ad infinitum is a valid refutation technique.


 REFORMATIO IN PEIUS ,,,,, change to worse ,,,,, A decision from a court of appeal is amended to a worse one. With certain exceptions, this is prohibited at the Boards of Appeal of the European Patent Office by case law.


 REGEM EGO COMITEM ME COMES REGEM ,,,,, you made me a Count, I will make you a King ,,,,, Motto of the Forbin family (fr)


 REGINAM OCCIDERE ,,,,, From "Reginam occidere nolite timere bonum est si omnes consentiunt ego non contradico", a sentence whose meaning is highly dependent on punctuation: either the speaker wishes a queen killed or not.^([99]) ,,,,, Written by John of Merania, bishop of Esztergom, to Hungarian nobles planning the assassination of Gertrude of Merania. The queen was assassinated as the plotters saw the bishop's message as an encouragement.


 REGNAT POPULUS ,,,,, the people rule ,,,,, State motto of Arkansas, adopted in 1907. Originally rendered in 1864 in the plural, _regnant populi_ ("the peoples rule"), but subsequently changed to the singular.


 REGNUM MARIAE PATRONA HUNGARIAE ,,,,, Kingdom of Mary, the Patron of Hungary ,,,,, Former motto of Hungary.


 REGRESSUS AD UTERUM ,,,,, return to the womb ,,,,, Concept used in psychoanalysis by Sándor Ferenczi and the Budapest School.


 REM ACU TETIGISTI ,,,,, You have touched the point with a needle ,,,,, i.e., "You have hit the nail on the head"


 REPETITA IUVANT ,,,,, repeating does good ,,,,, Usually said as a jocular remark to defend the speaker's (or writer's) choice to repeat some important piece of information to ensure reception by the audience.


 REPETITIO EST MATER STUDIORUM ,,,,, repetition is the mother of study/learning ,,,,, 


 REQUIEM AETERNAM ,,,,, eternal rest ,,,,, 


 REQUIESCAT IN PACE (R.I.P.) ,,,,, let him/her rest in peace ,,,,, Or "may he/she rest in peace". A benediction for the dead. Often inscribed on tombstones or other grave markers. "RIP" is commonly mistranslated as "Rest In Peace", though the two mean essentially the same thing.


 RERUM COGNOSCERE CAUSAS ,,,,, to learn the causes of things ,,,,, Motto of the University of Sheffield, the University of Guelph, and London School of Economics.


 RES FIRMA MITESCERE NESCIT ,,,,, a firm resolve does not know how to weaken ,,,,, Used in the 1985 film _American Flyers_ where it is colloquially translated as "once you got it up, keep it up".


 RES GESTAE ,,,,, things done ,,,,, A phrase used in law representing the belief that certain statements are made naturally, spontaneously and without deliberation during the course of an event, they leave little room for misunderstanding/misinterpretation upon hearing by someone else ( i.e. by the witness who will later repeat the statement to the court) and thus the courts believe that such statements carry a high degree of credibility.


 RES IPSA LOQUITUR ,,,,, the thing speaks for itself ,,,,, A phrase from the common law of torts meaning that negligence can be inferred from the fact that such an accident happened, without proof of exactly how.


 RES JUDICATA ,,,,, judged thing ,,,,, A matter which has been decided by a court. Often refers to the legal concept that once a matter has been finally decided by the courts, it cannot be litigated again (cf. _non bis in idem_ and double jeopardy).


 RES, NON VERBA ,,,,, "actions speak louder than words", or "deeds, not words" ,,,,, From rēs ("things, facts") the plural of rēs ("a thing, a fact") + nōn ("not") + verba ("words") the plural of verbum ("a word"). Literally meaning "things, not words" or "facts instead of words" but referring to that "actions be used instead of words".


 RES NULLIUS ,,,,, nobody's property ,,,,, Goods without an owner. Used for things or beings which belong to nobody and are up for grabs, e.g., uninhabited and uncolonized lands, wandering wild animals, etc. (cf. _terra nullius_, "no man's land").


 RES PUBLICA ,,,,, Pertaining to the state or public ,,,,, source of the word _republic_


 RESPICE ADSPICE PROSPICE ,,,,, look behind, look here, look ahead ,,,,, i.e., "examine the past, the present and future". Motto of CCNY.


 RESPICE FINEM ,,,,, look back at the end ,,,,, i.e., "have regard for the end" or "consider the end". Generally a _memento mori_, a warning to remember one's death. Motto of _Homerton College, Cambridge_, _Trinity College, Kandy_, Georgetown College in Kentucky , Turnbull High School, Glasgow, and the London Oratory School.


 RESPONDEAT SUPERIOR ,,,,, let the superior respond ,,,,, Regarded as a legal maxim in agency law, referring to the legal liability of the principal with respect to an employee. Whereas a hired independent contractor acting tortiously may not cause the principal to be legally liable, a hired employee acting tortiously will cause the principal (the employer) to be legally liable, even if the employer did nothing wrong.


 RESTITUTIO AD (OR _IN_) INTEGRUM ,,,,, restoration to original condition ,,,,, Principle behind the awarding of damages in common law negligence claims


 RESURGAM ,,,,, I shall arise ,,,,, ‘I shall rise again’, expressing Christian faith in resurrection at the Last Day. It appears, _inter alia_, in Charlotte Brontë's _Jane Eyre_, as the epitaph written on Helen Burns's grave; in a poem of Emily Dickinson: _Poems_ (1955) I. 56 (_"Arcturus" is his other name_), I slew a worm the other day — A ‘Savant’ passing by Murmured ‘Resurgam’ — ‘Centipede’! ‘Oh Lord—how frail are we’!; and in a letter of Vincent van Gogh.^([100]) The OED gives "1662 J. Trapp Annotations Old & New Testament I. 142 Howbeit he had hope in his death, and might write Resurgam on his grave" as its earliest attribution in the English _corpus_.


 RETINE VIM ISTAM, FALSA ENIM DICAM, SI COGES ,,,,, Restrain your strength, for if you compel me I will tell lies ,,,,, An utterance by the Delphic oracle recorded by Eusebius of Caesarea in _Praeparatio evangelica_, VI-5, translated from the Greek of Porphyry (c.f. E. H. Gifford's translation)^([101]) and used by William Wordsworth as a subtitle for his ballad "Anecdote for Fathers".


 REX REGUM FIDELUM ET ,,,,, king even of faithful kings ,,,,, Latin motto that appears on the crest of the Trinity Broadcasting Network of Paul and Jan Crouch.


 RIGOR MORTIS ,,,,, stiffness of death ,,,,, The rigidity of corpses when chemical reactions cause the limbs to stiffen about 3–4 hours after death. Other signs of death include drop in body temperature (_algor mortis_, "cold of death") and discoloration (_livor mortis_, "bluish color of death").


 RISUM TENEATIS, AMICI? ,,,,, Can you help laughing, friends? ,,,,, An ironic or rueful commentary, appended following a fanciful or unbelievable tale.


 RISUS ABUNDAT IN ORE STULTORUM ,,,,, laughter is abundant in the mouth of fools ,,,,, excessive and inappropriate laughter signifies stupidity.


 ROMA INVICTA ,,,,, Unconquerable Rome ,,,,, Inspirational motto inscribed on the Statue of Rome.


 ROMA LOCUTA, CAUSA FINITA ,,,,, Rome has spoken, the case is closed ,,,,, In Roman Catholic ecclesiology, doctrinal matters are ultimately decided by the Vatican.


 ROMANES EUNT DOMUS ,,,,, People called Romans they go the house ,,,,, An intentionally garbled Latin phrase from _Monty Python's Life of Brian_. Its intended meaning is "Romans, go home!", in Latin _Romani ite domum_.


 RORATE COELI ,,,,, drop down ye heavens ,,,,, aka _The Advent Prose_.


 ROSA RUBICUNDIOR, LILIO CANDIDIOR, OMNIBUS FORMOSIOR, SEMPER IN TE GLORIOR ,,,,, redder than the rose, whiter than the lilies, fairer than all things, I do ever glory in thee ,,,,, From _Veni, veni, venias (Carmina Burana)_.


 ROSAM QUAE MERUIT FERAT ,,,,, She who has earned the rose may bear it ,,,,, Motto from Sweet Briar College


 RUS IN URBE ,,,,, A countryside in the city ,,,,, Generally used to refer to a haven of peace and quiet within an urban setting, often a garden, but can refer to interior decoration.


 SALTUS IN DEMONSTRANDO ,,,,, leap in explaining ,,,,, a leap in logic, by which a necessary part of an equation is omitted. 

 SALUS IN ARDUIS ,,,,, a stronghold (or refuge) in difficulties ,,,,, a Roman Silver Age maxim. Also the school motto of Wellingborough School. 

 SALUS POPULI SUPREMA LEX ESTO ,,,,, the welfare of the people is to be the highest law ,,,,, From Cicero's _De Legibus_, book III, part III, sub. VIII. Quoted by John Locke in his Second Treatise, _On Civil Government_, to describe the proper organization of government. Also the state motto of Missouri. 

 SALVA VERITATE ,,,,, with truth intact ,,,,, Refers to two expressions that can be interchanged without changing the truth value of the statements in which they occur. 

 SALVATOR MUNDI ,,,,, Savior of the World ,,,,, Christian epithet, usually referring to Jesus. The title of paintings by Albrecht Dürer and Leonardo da Vinci. 

 SALVO ERRORE ET OMISSIONE (S.E.E.O.) ,,,,, save for error and omission ,,,,, Used as a reservation on statements of financial accounts. Often now given in English "errors and omissions excluded" or "e&oe". 

 SALVO HONORIS TITULO (SHT) ,,,,, Addressing oneself to someone whose title is unknown. ,,,,, 

 SANCTA SEDES ,,,,, Holy Chair ,,,,, literally, "holy seat". Refers to the Papacy or the Holy See. 

 SANCTA SIMPLICITAS ,,,,, holy innocence ,,,,, Or "sacred simplicity". 

 SANCTE ET SAPIENTER ,,,,, in a holy and wise way ,,,,, Also _sancte sapienter_ (holiness, wisdom), motto of several institutions, notably King's College London 

 SANCTUM SANCTORUM ,,,,, Holy of Holies ,,,,, referring to a more sacred and/or guarded place, within a lesser guarded, yet also holy location. 

 SAPERE AUDE ,,,,, dare to know ,,,,, From Horace's _Epistularum liber primus_, Epistle II, line 40. Made popular in Kant's essay _Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?_ defining the Age of Enlightenment. The phrase is common usage as a university motto. 

 SAPIENS QUI PROSPICIT ,,,,, wise is he who looks ahead ,,,,, Motto of Malvern College, England 

 SAPIENTI SAT ,,,,, enough for the wise ,,,,, From Plautus. Indicates that something can be understood without any need for explanation, as long as the listener has enough wisdom or common sense. Often extended to _dictum sapienti sat est_ ("enough has been said for the wise", commonly translated as "a word to the wise is enough"). 

 SAPIENTIA ET DOCTRINA ,,,,, wisdom and learning ,,,,, Motto of Fordham University, New York. Motto of Hill House School Doncaster, England. 

 SAPIENTIA ET ELOQUENTIA ,,,,, wisdom and eloquence ,,,,, One of the mottos of the Ateneo schools in the Philippines.^([102]) Motto of the Minerva Society 

 SAPIENTIA ET VERITAS ,,,,, wisdom and truth ,,,,, Motto of Christchurch Girls' High School, New Zealand. 

 SAPIENTIA ET VIRTUS ,,,,, wisdom and virtue ,,,,, Motto of the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. 

 SAPIENTIA IANUA VITAE ,,,,, wisdom is the gateway to life ,,,,, Motto of the Wirral Grammar School for Boys, Bebington, England. 

 SAPIENTIA MELIOR AURO ,,,,, wisdom is better than gold ,,,,, Motto of University of Deusto, Bilbao, San Sebastián, Spain. 

 SAPIENTIA, PAX, FRATERNITAS ,,,,, Wisdom, Peace, Fraternity ,,,,, Motto of Universidad de las Américas, Puebla, Cholula, Mexico. 

 SAT CELERITER FIERI QUIDQUID FIAT SATIS BENE ,,,,, That which has been done well has been done quickly enough ,,,,, One of the two favorite saying of Augustus. The other is "festina lente".^([103]) 

 SCIENTIA AC LABORE ,,,,, By/From/With knowledge and labour ,,,,, Motto of several institutions 

 SCIENTIA, AERE PERENNIUS ,,,,, knowledge, more lasting than bronze ,,,,, unknown origin, probably adapted from Horace's ode III (Exegi monumentum aere perennius). 

 SCIENTIA CUM RELIGIONE ,,,,, religion and knowledge united ,,,,, Motto of St Vincent's College, Potts Point 

 SCIENTIAE CEDIT MARE ,,,,, The sea yields to knowledge ,,,,, Motto of the United States Coast Guard Academy. 

 SCIENTIAE ET PATRIAE ,,,,, For science and fatherland ,,,,, Motto of University of Latvia 

 SCIENTIA ET LABOR ,,,,, knowledge and work ,,,,, motto of Universidad Nacional de Ingeniería 

 SCIENTIA ET SAPIENTIA ,,,,, knowledge and wisdom ,,,,, motto of Illinois Wesleyan University 

 SCIENTIA IMPERII DECUS ET TUTAMEN ,,,,, knowledge is the adornment and protection of the Empire ,,,,, Motto of Imperial College London 

 SCIENTIA IPSA POTENTIA EST ,,,,, knowledge itself is power ,,,,, Stated originally by Sir Francis Bacon in _Meditationes Sacrae_ (1597), which in modern times is often paraphrased as _scientia est potestas_ or _scientia potentia est_ (knowledge is power). 

 SCIENTIA VINCERE TENEBRAS ,,,,, conquering darkness by science ,,,,, Motto of several institutions, such as the Free University of Brussels (Vrije Universiteit Brussel). 

 SCILICET (SC. OR SS.) ,,,,, it is permitted to know ,,,,, that is to say; to wit; namely; in a legal caption, it provides a statement of venue or refers to a location. 

 SCIO ,,,,, I know ,,,,, 

 SCIO ME NIHIL SCIRE ,,,,, I know that I know nothing ,,,,, 

 SCIRE QUOD SCIENDUM ,,,,, knowledge which is worth having ,,,,, motto of now defunct publisher Small, Maynard & Company 

 SCRIBIMUS INDOCTI DOCTIQUE POEMATA PASSIM ,,,,, Each desperate blockhead dares to write ,,,,, as translated by Philip Francis. From Horace, _Epistularum liber secundus_ (1, 117)^([104]) and quoted in Fielding's _Tom Jones_; lit: "Learned or not, we shall write poems without distinction." 

 SCUTO AMORIS DIVINI ,,,,, by the shield of God's love ,,,,, The motto of Skidmore College 

 SECULO SECULORUM ,,,,, forever and ever ,,,,, 

 SED IPSE SPIRITUS POSTULAT PRO NOBIS, GEMITIBUS INENARRABILIBUS ,,,,, But the same Spirit intercedes incessantly for us, with inexpressible groans ,,,,, Romans 8:26 

 SED TERRAE GRAVIORA MANENT ,,,,, But on earth, worse things await ,,,,, Virgil, _Aeneid_ 6:84. 

 SEDE VACANTE ,,,,, with the seat being vacant ,,,,, The "seat" refers to the Holy See; the vacancy refers to the interregnum between two popes. 

 SEDES APOSTOLICA ,,,,, apostolic chair ,,,,, Synonymous with _Sancta Sedes_. 

 SEDES INCERTAE ,,,,, seat (i.e. location) uncertain ,,,,, Used in biological classification to indicate that there is no agreement as to which higher order grouping a taxon should be placed into. Abbreviated _sed. incert._ 

 SEDET, AETERNUMQUE SEDEBIT ,,,,, seat, be seated forever ,,,,, a Virgi's verse, means when you stop trying, then you lose 

 SEMEL IN ANNO LICET INSANIRE ,,,,, once in a year one is allowed to go crazy ,,,,, Concept expressed by various authors, such as Seneca, Saint Augustine and Horace. It became proverbial during the Middle Ages. 

 SEMPER AD MELIORA ,,,,, always towards better things ,,,,, Motto of several institutions 

 SEMPER ANTICUS ,,,,, always forward ,,,,, Motto of the 45th Infantry Division (United States) and its successor, the 45th Infantry Brigade Combat Team (United States) 

 SEMPER APERTUS ,,,,, always open ,,,,, Motto of University of Heidelberg 

 SEMPER ARDENS ,,,,, always burning ,,,,, Motto of Carl Jacobsen and name of a line of beers by Danish brewery Carlsberg. 

 SEMPER EADEM ,,,,, ever the same ,,,,, personal motto of Elizabeth I, appears above her royal coat of arms. Used as motto of Elizabeth College, Guernsey, Channel Islands, which was founded by Elizabeth I, and of Ipswich School, to whom Elizabeth granted a royal charter. Also the motto of the City of Leicester and Prince George's County. 

 SEMPER EXCELSIUS ,,,,, always higher ,,,,, Motto of the K.A.V. Lovania Leuven and the House of Wrigley-Pimley-McKerr ^([105]) 

 SEMPER FIDELIS ,,,,, always faithful ,,,,, Motto of several institutions, e.g. United States Marine Corps 

 SEMPER FORTIS ,,,,, always brave ,,,,, Unofficial motto of the United States Navy 

 SEMPER IDEM ,,,,, always the same ,,,,, Motto of Underberg 

 SEMPER IN EXCRETIA SUMUS SOLIM PROFUNDUM VARIAT ,,,,, We're always in the manure; only the depth varies. ,,,,, Lord de Ramsey, House of Lords, 21 January 1998^([106]) 

 SEMPER INSTANS ,,,,, always threatening ,,,,, Motto of 846 NAS Royal Navy 

 SEMPER INVICTA ,,,,, always invincible ,,,,, Motto of Warsaw 

 SEMPER NECESSITAS PROBANDI INCUMBIT EI QUI AGIT ,,,,, the necessity of proof always lies with the person who lays charges ,,,,, Latin maxim often associated with the burden of proof 

 SEMPER LIBER ,,,,, always free ,,,,, Motto of the city of Victoria, British Columbia 

 SEMPER PARATUS ,,,,, always prepared ,,,,, Motto of several institutions, e.g. United States Coast Guard 

 SEMPER PRIMUS ,,,,, always first ,,,,, Motto of several US military units 

 SEMPER PROGREDIENS ,,,,, always progressing ,,,,, Motto of the island of Sint Maarten, and of King City Secondary School in King City, Ontario, Canada, and of Fairfax High School (Fairfax, Virginia) 

 SEMPER REFORMANDA ,,,,, always in need of being reformed ,,,,, A phrase deriving from the Nadere Reformatie movement in the seventeenth century Dutch Reformed Church and widely but informally used in Reformed and Presbyterian churches today. It refers to the conviction of certain Reformed Protestant theologians that the church must continually re-examine itself in order to maintain its purity of doctrine and practice. The term first appeared in print in Jodocus van Lodenstein, _Beschouwinge van Zion_ (_Contemplation of Zion_), Amsterdam, 1674.^([107]) 

 SEMPER SURSUM ,,,,, always aim high ,,,,, Motto of Barrow-in-Furness, England. Motto of St. Stephen School, Chandigarh, India. Motto of St. Joseph's College, Allahabad, India. Motto of Palmerston North Girls' High School, Palmerston North, New Zealand. Motto of Vancouver Technical Secondary School, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. 

 SEMPER VIGILANS ,,,,, always vigilant ,,,,, Motto of several institutions (such as the US Air Force Auxiliary Civil Air Patrol). Also the motto of the city of San Diego, California. 

 SEMPER VIGILO ,,,,, always vigilant ,,,,, The motto of Scottish Police Forces, Scotland. 

 SENATUS POPULUSQUE ROMANUS (SPQR) ,,,,, The Senate and the People of Rome ,,,,, The official name of the Roman Republic. "SPQR" was carried on battle standards by the Roman legions. In addition to being an ancient Roman motto, it remains the motto of the modern city of Rome. 

 SENSU LATO ,,,,, with the broad, or general, meaning ,,,,, Less literally, "in the wide sense". 

 SENSU STRICTO cf. stricto sensu ,,,,, "with the tight meaning" ,,,,, Less literally, "in the strict sense". 

 SENSUS PLENIOR ,,,,, in the fuller meaning ,,,,, In biblical exegesis, the deeper meaning intended by God, not intended by the human author. 

 SEQUERE PECUNIAM ,,,,, follow the money ,,,,, In an effort to understand why things may be happening contrary to expectations, or even in alignment with them, this idiom suggests that keeping track of where money is going may show the basis for the observed behavior. Similar in spirit to the phrase _cui bono_ (who gains?) or _cui prodest_ (who advances?), but outside those phrases' historically legal context. 

 SERMO TUUS VERITAS EST ,,,,, Thy Word Is Truth ,,,,, motto of the General Theological Seminary, Cornelius Fontem Esua 

 SERO VENIENTES MALE SEDENTES ,,,,, those who are late are poorly seated ,,,,, 

 SERO VENIENTIBUS OSSA ,,,,, those who are late get bones ,,,,, 

 SERVABO FIDEM ,,,,, Keeper of the faith ,,,,, I will keep the faith. 

 SERVIAM ,,,,, I will serve ,,,,, The answer of St. Michael the Archangel to the _non serviam_, "I will not serve" of Satan, when the angels were tested by God on whether they will serve an inferior being, a man, Jesus, as their Lord. 

 SERVUS SERVORUM DEI ,,,,, servant of the servants of God ,,,,, A title for the Pope. 

 SESQUIPEDALIA VERBA ,,,,, words a foot and a half long ,,,,, From Horace's _Ars Poetica_, "_proicit ampullas et sesquipedalia verba_" ("he throws down his high-flown language and his foot-and-a-half-long words"). A self-referential jab at long words and needlessly elaborate language in general. 

 SI MONUMENTUM REQUIRIS CIRCUMSPICE ,,,,, If you seek (his) monument, look around you ,,,,, from the epitaph on Christopher Wren's tomb in St Paul's Cathedral. 

 SI NON OSCILLAS, NOLI TINTINNARE ,,,,, If you can't swing, don't ring ,,,,, Inscribed on a plaque above the front door of the Playboy mansion in Chicago. 

 SI OMNES... EGO NON ,,,,, if all ones... not I ,,,,, 

 SI PECCASSE NEGAMUS FALLIMUR ET NULLA EST IN NOBIS VERITAS ,,,,, if we deny having made a mistake, we are deceived, and there's no truth in us ,,,,, From Christopher Marlowe's _The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus_, where the phrase is translated "if we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and there's no truth in us." (cf. 1 John 1:8 in the New Testament) 

 SI QUAERIS PENINSULAM AMOENAM CIRCUMSPICE ,,,,, if you seek a delightful peninsula, look around ,,,,, Said to have been based on the tribute to architect Christopher Wren in St Paul's Cathedral, London: _si monumentum requiris, circumspice_ (see above). State motto of Michigan, adopted in 1835. 

 SI QUID NOVISTI RECTIUS ISTIS, CANDIDUS IMPERTI; SI NIL, HIS UTERE MECUM. ,,,,, if you can better these principles, tell me; if not, join me in following them ,,,,, Horace, _Epistles_ I:6, 67–68 

 SI TACUISSES, PHILOSOPHUS MANSISSES ,,,,, If you had kept your silence, you would have stayed a philosopher ,,,,, This quote is often attributed to the Latin philosopher Boethius of the late fifth and early sixth centuries. It translates literally as, "If you had been silent, you would have remained a philosopher." The phrase illustrates a common use of the subjunctive verb mood. Among other functions it expresses actions contrary to fact. Sir Humphrey Appleby translated it to the PM as: "If you'd kept your mouth shut we might have thought you were clever." 

 SI VALES VALEO (SVV) ,,,,, if you are well, I am well (abbr) ,,,,, A common beginning for ancient Roman letters. An abbreviation of _si vales bene est ego valeo_, alternatively written as SVBEEV. The practice fell out of fashion and into obscurity with the decline in Latin literacy. 

 SI VIS AMARI AMA ,,,,, If you want to be loved, love ,,,,, This is often attributed to the Roman philosopher Seneca, found in the sixth of his letters to Lucilius. 

 SI VIS PACEM, PARA BELLUM ,,,,, if you want peace, prepare for war ,,,,, From Publius Flavius Vegetius Renatus, _De Re Militari_. Origin of the name _parabellum_ for some ammunition and firearms, such as the Luger Parabellum. (Similar to _igitur qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum_ and _in pace ut sapiens aptarit idonea bello_.) 

 SIC ,,,,, thus ,,,,, Or "just so". States that the preceding quoted material appears exactly that way in the source, despite any errors of spelling, grammar, usage, or fact that may be present. Used only for previous quoted text; _ita_ or similar must be used to mean "thus" when referring to something about to be stated. 

 SIC CURRITE UT COMPREHENDATIS ,,,,, Run to win ,,,,, More specifically, So run, that ye may obtain, 1 Corinthians 24. Motto of Divine Word University, Madang, Papua New Guinea. 

 SIC ET NON ,,,,, thus and not ,,,,, More simply, "yes and no". 

 SIC GORGIAMUS ALLOS SUBJECTATOS NUNC ,,,,, we gladly feast on those who would subdue us ,,,,, Mock-Latin motto of The Addams Family. 

 SIC INFIT ,,,,, so it begins ,,,,, 

 SIC ITUR AD ASTRA ,,,,, thus you shall go to the stars ,,,,, From Virgil, _Aeneid_ book IX, line 641. Possibly the source of the _ad astra_ phrases. Motto of several institutions, including the Royal Canadian Air Force. 

 SIC PARVIS MAGNA ,,,,, greatness from small beginnings ,,,,, Motto of Sir Francis Drake 

 SIC PASSIM ,,,,, Thus here and there ,,,,, Used when referencing books; see _passim_. 

 SIC SEMPER ERAT, ET SIC SEMPER ERIT ,,,,, Thus has it always been, and thus shall it ever be ,,,,, 

 SIC SEMPER TYRANNIS ,,,,, thus always to tyrants ,,,,, Attributed to Brutus at the time of Julius Caesar's assassination, and to John Wilkes Booth at the time of Abraham Lincoln's assassination; whether it was actually said at either of these events is disputed. State motto of Virginia, adopted in 1776. 

 SIC TRANSIT GLORIA MUNDI ,,,,, thus passes the glory of the world ,,,,, A reminder that all things are fleeting. During Papal coronations, a monk reminds the Pope of his mortality by saying this phrase, preceded by _pater sancte_ ("holy father") while holding before his eyes a burning paper illustrating the passing nature of earthly glories. This is similar to the tradition of a slave in a Roman triumphs whispering _memento mori_ in the ear of the celebrant. 

 SIC UTERE TUO UT ALIENUM NON LAEDAS ,,,,, use [what is] yours so as not to harm [what is] of others ,,,,, Or "use your property in such a way that you do not damage others'". A legal maxim related to property ownership laws, often shortened to simply _sic utere_ ("use it thus"). 

 SIC VITA EST ,,,,, thus is life ,,,,, Or "such is life". Indicates that a circumstance, whether good or bad, is an inherent aspect of living. 

 SIDERE MENS EADEM MUTATO ,,,,, Though the constellations change, the mind is universal ,,,,, Latin motto of the University of Sydney. 

 SIGNETUR (SIG) _or_ (S/) ,,,,, let it be labeled ,,,,, Medical shorthand 

 SIGNUM FIDEI ,,,,, Sign of the Faith ,,,,, Motto of the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools. 

 SILENTIUM EST AUREUM ,,,,, silence is golden ,,,,, Latinization of the English expression "silence is golden". Also Latinized as _silentium est aurum_ ("silence is gold"). 

 SIMILIA SIMILIBUS CURANTUR SIMILIA SIMILIBUS CURENTUR ,,,,, similar things take care of similar things let similar things take care of similar things ,,,,, "like cures like" and "let like be cured by like"; the first form ("curAntur") is indicative, while the second form ("curEntur") is subjunctive. The indicative form is found in Paracelsus (16th century), while the subjunctive form is said by Samuel Hahnemann, founder of homeopathy, and is known as the law of similars. 

 SIMILIA SIMILIBUS SOLVUNTUR ,,,,, similar substances will dissolve similar substances ,,,,, Used as a general rule in chemistry; "like dissolves like" refers to the ability of polar or non polar solvents to dissolve polar or non polar solutes respectively.^([108]) 

 SIMPLEX SIGILLUM VERI ,,,,, simplicity is the sign of truth ,,,,, expresses a sentiment akin to Keep It Simple, Stupid 

 SINCERE ET CONSTANTER ,,,,, sincere and constant ,,,,, Motto of the Order of the Red Eagle 

 SINE ANNO (S.A.) ,,,,, without a year ,,,,, Used in bibliographies to indicate that the date of publication of a document is unknown. 

 SINE DIE ,,,,, without a day ,,,,, Originally from old common law texts, where it indicates that a final, dispositive order has been made in the case. In modern legal context, it means there is nothing left for the court to do, so no date for further proceedings is set, resulting in an "adjournment sine die". 

 SINE IRA ET STUDIO ,,,,, without anger and fondness ,,,,, Thus, impartially. From Tacitus, _Annals_ 1.1. 

 SINE HONORIS TITULO ,,,,, without honorary title ,,,,, Addressing oneself to someone whose title is unknown. 

 SINE LABORE NON ERIT PANIS IN ORE ,,,,, without labour there will be no bread in mouth ,,,,, 

 SINE LOCO (S.L.) ,,,,, without a place ,,,,, Used in bibliographies to indicate that the place of publication of a document is unknown. 

 SINE METU ,,,,, "without fear" ,,,,, Motto of Jameson Irish Whiskey 

 SINE NOMINE (S.N.) ,,,,, "without a name" ,,,,, Used in bibliographies to indicate that the publisher of a document is unknown. 

 SINE POENA NULLA LEX ,,,,, Without penalty, there is no law ,,,,, Refers to the ineffectiveness of a law without the means of enforcement 

 SINE PROLE ,,,,, Without offspring ,,,,, Frequently abbreviated to "s.p." or "d.s.p." (_decessit sine prole_ – "died without offspring") in genealogical works. 

 SINE PROLE SUPERSTITE ,,,,, Without surviving children ,,,,, Without surviving offspring (even in abstract terms) 

 SINE TIMORE AUT FAVORE ,,,,, Without Fear or Favor ,,,,, St.George's School, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada motto 

 SINE QUA NON ,,,,, without which not ,,,,, Used to denote something that is an essential part of the whole. See also _condicio sine qua non_. 

 SINE REMEDIIS MEDICINA DEBILIS EST ,,,,, without remedies medicine is powerless ,,,,, Inscription on a stained glass in the conference hall of a pharmaceutical mill in Kaunas, Lithuania. 

 SINE SCIENTIA ARS NIHIL EST ,,,,, without knowledge, skill is nothing ,,,,, Motto of The International Diving Society, and motto of Oxford University Medical Students' Society 

 SISTO ACTIVITATEM ,,,,, I cease the activity ,,,,, Phrase, used to cease the activities of the Sejm upon the _liberum veto_ principle 

 SIT NOMINE DIGNA ,,,,, may it be worthy of the name ,,,,, Motto of Rhodesia 

 SIT SINE LABE DECUS ,,,,, let honour stainless be ,,,,, Motto of the Brisbane Boys' College (Brisbane, Australia). 

 SIT TIBI TERRA LEVIS ,,,,, may the earth be light to you ,,,,, Commonly used on gravestones, often contracted as S.T.T.L., the same way as today's R.I.P. 

 SIT VENIA VERBO ,,,,, may there be forgiveness for the word ,,,,, Similar to the English idiom "pardon my French". 

 SOL IUSTITIAE ILLUSTRA NOS ,,,,, sun of justice, shine upon us ,,,,, Motto of Utrecht University. 

 SOL LUCET OMNIBUS ,,,,, the sun shines on everyone ,,,,, Petronius, _Satyricon Lybri_ 100. 

 SOL OMNIA REGIT ,,,,, the sun rules over everything ,,,,, Inscription near the entrance to Frombork Museum 

 SOLA FIDE ,,,,, by faith alone ,,,,, The material principle of the Protestant Reformation and one of the five solas, referring to the Protestant claim that the Bible teaches that men are saved by faith even without works. 

 SOLA DOSIS FACIT VENEMUM ,,,,, the dose makes the poison ,,,,, It is credited to Paracelsus who expressed the classic toxicology maxim "All things are poison and nothing is without poison; only the dose makes a thing not a poison." 

 SOLA GRATIA ,,,,, by grace alone ,,,,, A motto of the Protestant Reformation and one of the five solas, referring to the Protestant claim that salvation is an unearned gift (cf. _ex gratia_), not a direct result of merit. 

 SOLA LINGUA BONA EST LINGUA MORTUA ,,,,, the only good language is a dead language ,,,,, Example of dog Latin humor. 

 SOLA SCRIPTURA ,,,,, by scripture alone ,,,,, The formal principle of the Protestant Reformation and one of the five solas, referring to the Protestant idea that the Bible alone is the ultimate authority, not the Pope or tradition. 

 SOLA NOBILITAT VIRTUS ,,,,, virtue alone ennobles ,,,,, 

 SOLAMEN MISERIS SOCIOS HABUISSE DOLORIS ,,,,, misery loves company ,,,,, From Christopher Marlowe's _The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus_. 

 SOLI DEO GLORIA (S.D.G.) ,,,,, glory to God alone ,,,,, A motto of the Protestant Reformation and one of the five solas, referring to the idea that God is the creator of all good things and deserves all the praise for them. Johann Sebastian Bach often signed his manuscripts with the abbreviation S.D.G. to invoke this phrase, as well as with AMDG (_ad maiorem Dei gloriam_). The motto of the MasterWorks Festival, an annual Christian performing arts festival. 

 SOLUS CHRISTUS ,,,,, Christ alone ,,,,, A motto of the Protestant Reformation and one of the five solas, referring to the Protestant claim that the Bible teaches that Jesus is the only mediator between God and mankind. Also rendered _solo Christo_ ("by Christ alone"). 

 SOLUS IPSE ,,,,, I alone ,,,,, 

 SOLVITUR AMBULANDO ,,,,, it is solved by walking ,,,,, The problem is solved by taking a walk, or by simple experiment. 

 SPARTAM NACTUS ES; HANC EXORNA ,,,,, your lot is cast in Sparta, be a credit to it ,,,,, from Euripides's _Telephus_, Agamemnon to Menelaus.^([109]) 

 SPECIALIA GENERALIBUS DEROGANT ,,,,, special departs from general ,,,,, 

 SPECIES NOVA ,,,,, new species ,,,,, Used in biological taxonomy 

 SPECULUM SPECULORUM ,,,,, mirror of mirrors ,,,,, 

 SPEM GREGIS ,,,,, the hope of the flock ,,,,, from Virgil's _Eclogues_ 

 SPEM REDUXIT ,,,,, he has restored hope ,,,,, Motto of New Brunswick. 

 SPERO MELIORA ,,,,, I hope for better things ,,,,, 

 SPES BONA ,,,,, good hope ,,,,, Motto of University of Cape Town. 

 SPES VINCIT THRONUM ,,,,, hope conquers (overcomes) the throne ,,,,, Refers to Revelation 3:21, "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne." On the John Winthrop family tombstone, Boston, Massachusetts. 

 SPIRITUS MUNDI ,,,,, spirit of the world ,,,,, From The Second Coming (poem) by William Butler Yeats. Refers to Yeats' belief that each human mind is linked to a single vast intelligence, and that this intelligence causes certain universal symbols to appear in individual minds. The idea is similar to Carl Jung's concept of the collective unconscious. 

 SPIRITUS UBI VULT SPIRAT ,,,,, the spirit spreads wherever it wants ,,,,, Refers to The Gospel of Saint John 3:8, where he mentions how Jesus told Nicodemus "The wind blows wherever it wants, and even though you can hear its noise, you don't know where it comes from or where it goes. The same thing happens to whomever has been born of the Spirit." It is the motto of Cayetano Heredia University^([110]) 

 SPLENDOR SINE OCCASU ,,,,, brightness without setting ,,,,, Loosely "splendour without diminishment" or "magnificence without ruin". Motto of British Columbia. 

 STAMUS CONTRA MALO ,,,,, we stand against by evil ,,,,, The motto of the Jungle Patrol in _The Phantom_. The phrase actually violates Latin grammar because of a mistranslation from English, as the preposition _contra_ takes the accusative case. The correct Latin rendering of "we stand against evil" would be "_stamus contra malum_". 

 STANTE PEDE ,,,,, with a standing foot ,,,,, "Immediately". 

 STARE DECISIS ,,,,, to stand by the decided things ,,,,, To uphold previous rulings, recognize precedent. 

 STAT SUA CUIQUE DIES ,,,,, There is a day [turn] for everybody ,,,,, Virgil, _Aeneid_, X 467 

 STATIM (STAT) ,,,,, "immediately" ,,,,, Medical shorthand used following an urgent request.^([111]) 

 STATIO BENE FIDE CARINIS ,,,,, A safe harbour for ships ,,,,, Motto of Cork City, Ireland. Adapted from Virgil's _Aeneid_ (II, 23: _statio male fida carinis_, "an unsafe harbour") but corrupted for unknown reasons to "fide". 

 STATUS QUO ,,,,, the situation in which ,,,,, The current condition or situation. Also _status quo ante_ ("the situation in which [things were] before"), referring to the state of affairs prior to some upsetting event (cf. reset button technique). 

 STATUS QUO ANTE BELLUM ,,,,, the state before the war ,,,,, A common term in peace treaties. 

 STET ,,,,, let it stand ,,,,, Marginal mark in proofreading to indicate that something previously deleted or marked for deletion should be retained. 

 STET FORTUNA DOMUS ,,,,, let the fortune of the house stand ,,,,, First part of the motto of Harrow School, England, and inscribed upon Ricketts House, at the California Institute of Technology. 

 STIPENDIUM PECCATI MORS EST ,,,,, the reward of sin is death ,,,,, From Christopher Marlowe's _The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus_. (See Rom 6:23, "For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.") 

 STRENUIS ARDUA CEDUNT ,,,,, the heights yield to endeavour ,,,,, Motto of the University of Southampton. 

 STRICTO SENSU cf. sensu stricto ,,,,, with the tight meaning ,,,,, Less literally, "in the strict sense". 

 STUPOR MUNDI ,,,,, the wonder of the world ,,,,, A title given to Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor. More literally translated "the bewilderment of the world", or, in its original, pre-Medieval sense, "the stupidity of the world". 

 SUA SPONTE ,,,,, by its own accord ,,,,, Legal term when a court takes up a motion on its own initiative, not because any of the parties to the case has made the motion. The regimental motto of the 75th Ranger Regiment of the U.S. Army. 

 SUB ANNO ,,,,, under the year ,,,,, Commonly abbreviated _sa_, it is used in citing annals, which record events by year. 

 SUB CRUCE LUMEN ,,,,, The Light Under the Cross ,,,,, Motto of the University of Adelaide, Australia. Refers to the figurative "light of learning" and the Southern Cross constellation, Crux. 

 SUB DIVO ,,,,, under the wide open sky ,,,,, Also, "under the sky", "in the open air", "out in the open" or "outdoors". Ablative "divo" does not distinguish divus, divi, a god, from divum, divi, the sky. 

 SUB FINEM ,,,,, toward the end ,,,,, Used in citations to refer to the end of a book, page, etc., and abbreviated 's.f.' Used after the page number or title. E.g., 'p. 20 _s.f._ ' 

 SUB IOVE FRIGIDO ,,,,, under cold Jupiter ,,,,, At night; from Horace's _Odes_ 1.1:25 

 SUB JUDICE ,,,,, under a judge ,,,,, Said of a case that cannot be publicly discussed until it is finished. Also _sub iudice_. 

 SUB POENA ,,,,, under penalty ,,,,, Commonly rendered _subpoena_. Said of a request, usually by a court, that must be complied with on pain of punishment. Examples include _subpoena duces tecum_ ("take with you under penalty"), a court summons to appear and produce tangible evidence, and _subpoena ad testificandum_ ("under penalty to testify"), a summons to appear and give oral testimony. 

 SUB ROSA ,,,,, under the rose ,,,,, "In secret", "privately", "confidentially", or "covertly". In the Middle Ages, a rose was suspended from the ceiling of a council chamber to indicate that what was said in the "under the rose" was not to be repeated outside. This practice originates in Greek mythology, where Aphrodite gave a rose to her son Eros, and he, in turn, gave it to Harpocrates, the god of silence, to ensure that his mother's indiscretions—or those of the gods in general, in other accounts—were kept under wraps. 

 SUB NOMINE (SUB NOM.) ,,,,, under the name ,,,,, "in the name of", "under the title of"; used in legal citations to indicate the name under which the litigation continued. 

 SUB SILENTIO ,,,,, under silence ,,,,, implied but not expressly stated. 

 SUB SPECIE AETERNITATIS ,,,,, under the sight of eternity ,,,,, Thus, "from eternity's point of view". From Spinoza, _Ethics_. 

 SUB SPECIE DEI ,,,,, under the sight of God ,,,,, "from God's point of view or perspective". 

 SUB TUUM PRAESIDIUM ,,,,, Beneath thy compassion ,,,,, Name of the oldest extant hymn to the Theotokos (Blessed Virgin Mary). Also "under your protection". A popular school motto. 

 SUB UMBRA FLOREO ,,,,, Under the shade I flourish ,,,,, National Motto of Belize, referring to the shade of the mahogany tree. 

 SUB VERBO; SUB VOCE ,,,,, ,,,,, Under the word or heading, as in a dictionary; abbreviated _s.v._ 

 SUBLIMIS AB UNDA ,,,,, Raised from the waves ,,,,, Motto of King Edward VII and Queen Mary School, Lytham 

 SUBSISTE SERMONEM STATIM ,,,,, stop speaking immediately ,,,,, 

 SUCCISA VIRESCIT ,,,,, Cut down, we grow back stronger ,,,,, Motto of Delbarton School 

 SUDETIA NON CANTAT ,,,,, One doesn't sing on the Sudeten Mountains ,,,,, Saying from Hanakia 

 SUI GENERIS ,,,,, Of its own kind ,,,,, In a class of its own. 

 SUI IURIS ,,,,, Of one's own right ,,,,, Capable of responsibility. Has both legal and ecclesiastical use. Commonly rendered _sui juris_. 

 SUM QUOD ERIS ,,,,, I am what you will be ,,,,, A gravestone inscription to remind the reader of the inevitability of death (cf. _memento mori_). Also rendered _fui quod sis_ ("I have been what you are") and _tu fui ego eris_ ("I have been you, you will be I"). 

 SUM QUOD SUM ,,,,, I am what I am ,,,,, from Augustine's Sermon No. 76.^([112]) 

 SUMMA CUM LAUDE ,,,,, with highest praise ,,,,, 

 SUMMA POTESTAS ,,,,, sum or totality of power ,,,,, It refers to the final authority of power in government. For example, power of the Sovereign. 

 SUMMA SUMMARUM ,,,,, all in all ,,,,, Literally "sum of sums". When a short conclusion is rounded up at the end of some elaboration. 

 SUMMUM BONUM ,,,,, the supreme good ,,,,, Literally "highest good". Also _summum malum_ ("the supreme evil"). 

 SUMMUM IUS, SUMMA INIURIA ,,,,, supreme law, supreme injustice ,,,,, From Cicero (De officiis, I, 10, 33). An acritical application of law, without understanding and respect of laws's purposes and without considering the overall circumstances, is often a means of supreme injustice. A similar sentence appears in Terence (Heautontimorumenos, IV, 5): IUS SUMMUM SAEPE SUMMA EST MALITIA ("supreme justice is often out of supreme malice (or wickedness)"). 

 SUNT LACRIMAE RERUM ,,,,, there are tears for things ,,,,, From Virgil, _Aeneid_. Followed by _et mentem mortalia tangunt_ ("and mortal things touch my mind"). Aeneas cries as he sees Carthaginian temple murals depicting the deaths of the Trojan War. See also _hinc illae lacrimae_. 

 SUNT OMNES UNUM ,,,,, they are all one ,,,,, 

 SUNT PUERI PUERI, PUERI PUERILIA TRACTANT ,,,,, Children are children, and children do childish things ,,,,, anonymous proverb 

 SUO JURE ,,,,, in one's own right ,,,,, Used in the context of titles of nobility, for instance where a wife may hold a title in her own right rather than through her marriage. 

 SUO MOTU ,,,,, upon one's own initiative ,,,,, Also rendered _suo moto_. Usually used when a court of law, upon its own initiative, (i.e., no petition has been filed) proceeds against a person or authority that it deems has committed an illegal act. It is used chiefly in South Asia.^([_citation\ ne eded_]) 

 SUOS CULTORES SCIENTIA CORONAT ,,,,, Knowledge crowns those who seek her ,,,,, The motto of Syracuse University, New York. 

 SUPER FIRMUM FUNDAMENTUM DEI ,,,,, On the firm foundation of God ,,,,, The motto of Ursinus College, Pennsylvania. 

 SUPER FORNICAM ,,,,, on the lavatory ,,,,, Where Thomas More accused the reformer, Martin Luther, of going to celebrate Mass. 

 SUPERBIA IN PROELIA ,,,,, pride in battle ,,,,, Motto of Manchester City F.C. 

 SUPERO OMNIA ,,,,, I surpass everything ,,,,, A declaration that one succeeds above all others. 

 SURDO OPPEDERE ,,,,, to belch before the deaf ,,,,, From Erasmus' collection of annotated Adagia (1508): a useless action. 

 SURGAM ,,,,, I shall rise ,,,,, Motto of Columbia University's Philolexian Society. 

 SURSUM CORDA ,,,,, Lift up your hearts ,,,,, 

 SUTOR, NE ULTRA CREPIDAM ,,,,, Cobbler, no further than the sandal! ,,,,, Thus, don't offer your opinion on things that are outside your competence. It is said that the Greek painter Apelles once asked the advice of a cobbler on how to render the sandals of a soldier he was painting. When the cobbler started offering advice on other parts of the painting, Apelles rebuked him with this phrase in Greek, and it subsequently became a popular Latin expression. 

 SUUM CUIQUE TRIBUERE ,,,,, to render to every man his due ,,,,, One of Justinian I's three basic precepts of law. Also shortened to _suum cuique_ ("to each his own"). 

 S.V. ,,,,, ,,,,, Abbreviation for _sub verbo_ or _sub voce_ (see above). 

 TABULA GRATULATORIA ,,,,, congratulatory tablet ,,,,, A list of congratulations.


 TABULA RASA ,,,,, scraped tablet ,,,,, Thus, "blank slate". Romans used to write on wax-covered wooden tablets, which were erased by scraping with the flat end of the stylus. John Locke used the term to describe the human mind at birth, before it had acquired any knowledge.


 TALIS QUALIS ,,,,, just as such ,,,,, "Such as it is" or "as such".


 TALITER QUALITER ,,,,, somewhat ,,,,, 


 TALIUM DEI REGNUM ,,,,, for of such (little children) is the kingdom of God ,,,,, from St Mark's gospel 10:14 "_talium (parvuli) est enim regnum Dei_"; similar in St Matthew's gospel 19:14 "_talium est enim regnum caelorum_" ("for of such is the kingdom of heaven"); motto of the Cathedral School, Townsville.


 TANQUAM EX UNGUE LEONEM ,,,,, we know the lion by his claw ,,,,, Said in 1697 by Johann Bernoulli about Isaac Newton's anonymously submitted solution to Bernoulli's challenge regarding the Brachistochrone curve.


 TARDE VENIENTIBUS OSSA ,,,,, To the late are left the bones ,,,,, 


 TE OCCIDERE POSSUNT SED TE EDERE NON POSSUNT NEFAS EST ,,,,, They can kill you, but they cannot eat you, it is against the law. ,,,,, The motto of the fictional Enfield Tennis Academy in the David Foster Wallace novel _Infinite Jest_. Translated in the novel as "They can kill you, but the legalities of eating you are quite a bit dicier".


 TECHNICA IMPENDI NATIONI ,,,,, Technology impulses nations ,,,,, Motto of Technical University of Madrid


 TEMET NOSCE ,,,,, know thyself ,,,,, A reference to the Greek γνῶθι σεαυτόν (_gnothi seauton_), inscribed on the _pronaos_ of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, according to the Greek periegetic writer Pausanias (10.24.1). Rendered also with _nosce te ipsum_, _temet nosce_ ("thine own self know") appears in _The Matrix_ translated as "know thyself".


 TEMPORA HEROICA ,,,,, Heroic Age ,,,,, Literally "Heroic Times"; refers to the period between the mythological Titanomachy and the (relatively) historical Trojan War.


 TEMPORA MUTANTUR ET NOS MUTAMUR IN ILLIS ,,,,, the times are changing, and we change in them ,,,,, 16th century variant of two classical lines of Ovid: _tempora labuntur_ ("time labors", _Fasti_) and _omnia mutantur_ ("everything changes", _Metamorphoses_). See entry for details.


 TEMPUS EDAX RERUM ,,,,, time, devourer of all things ,,,,, Also "time, that devours all things", literally: "time, gluttonous of things", _edax_: adjectival form of the verb _edo_ to eat. From Ovid, Metamorphoses, 15, 234-236.


 TEMPUS FUGIT ,,,,, Time flees. ,,,,, From Virgil's _Georgics_ (Book III, line 284), where it appears as _fugit inreparabile tempus_. A common sundial motto. See also _tempus volat, hora fugit_ below.


 ,,,,, Time flies. ,,,,, 


 TEMPUS RERUM IMPERATOR ,,,,, time, commander of all things ,,,,, "Tempus Rerum Imperator" has been adopted by the Google Web Accelerator project. It is shown in the "About Google Web Accelerator" page.


 TEMPUS VERNUM ,,,,, spring time ,,,,, Name of song by popular Irish singer Enya


 TEMPUS VOLAT HORA FUGIT ,,,,, time flies, the hour flees ,,,,, 


 TENDIT IN ARDUA VIRTUS ,,,,, virtue strives for what is difficult ,,,,, Appears in Ovid's _Epistulae ex Ponto_


 TENEO TE AFRICA ,,,,, I hold you, Africa! ,,,,, Suetonius attributes this to Julius Caesar, from when Caesar was on the African coast.


 TENTANDA VIA ,,,,, The way must be tried ,,,,, motto for York University


 TER IN DIE (T.I.D.) ,,,,, thrice in a day ,,,,, Medical shorthand for "three times a day".


 TERMINAT HORA DIEM; TERMINAT AUCTOR OPUS. ,,,,, The hour finishes the day; the author finishes his work. ,,,,, Phrase concluding Christopher Marlowe's play _Doctor Faustus_.^([113])


 TERMINUS ANTE QUEM ,,,,, limit before which ,,,,, In archaeology or history, refers to the date before which an artifact or feature must have been deposited. Used with _terminus post quem_ ("limit after which"). Similarly, _terminus ad quem_ ("limit to which") may also refer to the latest possible date of a non-punctual event (period, era, etc.), while _terminus a quo_ ("limit from which") may refer to the earliest such date.


 TERRA AUSTRALIS INCOGNITA ,,,,, unknown southern land ,,,,, First name used to refer to the Australian continent.


 TERRA FIRMA ,,,,, solid land ,,,,, Often used to refer to the ground.


 TERRA INCOGNITA ,,,,, unknown land ,,,,, 


 TERRA NOVA ,,,,, new land ,,,,, Latin name of Newfoundland (island portion of Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador, capital- St. John's), also root of French name of same, Terre-Neuve


 TERRA NULLIUS ,,,,, land of none ,,,,, That is, no man's land. A neutral or uninhabited area, or a land not under the sovereignty of any recognized political entity.


 TERRAS IRRADIENT ,,,,, let them illuminate the lands ,,,,, Or "let them give light to the world". An allusion to Isaiah 6.3: _plena est omnis terra gloria eius_ ("the whole earth is full of his glory"). Sometimes mistranslated as "they will illuminate the lands" based on mistaking _irradiare_ for a future indicative third-conjugation verb, whereas it is actually a present subjunctive first-conjugation verb. Motto of Amherst College; the college's original mission was to educate young men to serve God.


 TERTIUM NON DATUR ,,,,, no third (possibility) is given ,,,,, A logical axiom that a claim is either true or false, with no third option.


 TERTIUM QUID ,,,,, a third something ,,,,, 1. Something that cannot be classified into either of two groups considered exhaustive; an intermediate thing or factor. 2. A third person or thing of indeterminate character.


 TESTIS UNUS, TESTIS NULLUS ,,,,, one witness is not a witness ,,,,, A law principle expressing that a single witness is not enough to corroborate a story.


 TIBI CORDI IMMACULATO CONCREDIMUS NOS AC CONSECRAMUS ,,,,, We consecrate to your immaculate heart and entrust to you (Mary) for safekeeping ,,,,, The inscription found on top of the central door of the Minor Basilica of the Immaculate Conception, otherwise known as the Manila Cathedral in the Philippines


 TIMEO DANAOS ET DONA FERENTES ,,,,, I fear Greeks even if they bring gifts ,,,,, _Danaos_ being a term for the Greeks. In Virgil's _Aeneid_, II, 49, the phrase is said by Laocoön when warning his fellow Trojans against accepting the Trojan Horse. The full original quote is _quidquid id est timeo Danaos et dona ferentis_, _quidquid id est_ meaning "whatever it is" and _ferentis_ being an archaic form of _ferentes_. Commonly mistranslated "Beware of Greeks bearing gifts".


 TIMIDI MATER NON FLET ,,,,, A coward's mother does not weep ,,,,, proverb; occasionally appears on loading screens in the game Rome: Total War.


 TIMOR MORTIS CONTURBAT ME ,,,,, the fear of death confounds me ,,,,, Refrain originating in the response to the seventh lesson in the Office of the Dead. In the Middle Ages, this service was read each day by clerics. As a refrain, it appears also in other poems and can frequently be found inscribed on tombs.


 TOTUS TUUS ,,,,, totally yours ,,,,, Offering one's life in total commitment to another. The motto was adopted by Pope John Paul II to signify his love and servitude to Mary the Mother of Jesus.


 TRANSIRE BENEFACIENDO ,,,,, to travel along while doing good ,,,,, Literally "beneficial passage." Mentioned in "The Seamy Side of History" (L'envers de l'histoire contemporaine, 1848), part of _La Comédie humaine_, by Honoré de Balzac, and _Around the World in Eighty Days_ by Jules Verne.


 TRANSLATIO IMPERII ,,,,, transfer of rule ,,,,, Used to express the belief in the transfer of imperial authority from the Roman Empire of antiquity to the Medieval Holy Roman Empire.


 TRES FACIUNT COLLEGIUM ,,,,, three makes company ,,,,, It takes three to have a valid group; three is the minimum number of members for an organization or a corporation.


 TREUGA DEI ,,,,, Truce of God ,,,,, A decree by the medieval Church that all feuds should be cancelled during the Sabbath—effectively from Wednesday or Thursday night until Monday. See also _Peace and Truce of God_.


 TRIA JUNCTA IN UNO ,,,,, Three joined in one ,,,,, Motto of the Order of the Bath


 TU AUTEM DOMINE MISERERE NOBIS ,,,,, But Thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us ,,,,, Phrase said at the end of biblical readings in the liturgy of the medieval church. Also used in brief, "tu autem", as a _memento mori_ epitaph.


 TU FUI EGO ERIS ,,,,, I was you; you will be me ,,,,, Thus, "what you are, I was; what I am, you will be.". A _memento mori_ gravestone inscription to remind the reader that death is unavoidable (cf. _sum quod eris_).


 TU NE CEDE MALIS, SED CONTRA AUDENTIOR ITO ,,,,, you should not give in to evils, but proceed ever more boldly against them ,,,,, From Virgil, _Aeneid_, 6, 95.


 TU QUOQUE ,,,,, you too ,,,,, The logical fallacy of attempting to defend one's position merely by pointing out the same weakness in one's opponent.


 TU STULTUS ES ,,,,, you are stupid ,,,,, _Motto_ for the satirical news organization, _The Onion_


 TUEBOR ,,,,, I will protect ,,,,, Found on the Great Seal on the flag of the state of Michigan.


 TUNICA PROPIOR EST PALLIO ,,,,, A tunic is closer to the body than a cape ,,,,, 


 TURRIS FORTIS MIHI DEUS ,,,,, God is my strong tower ,,,,, Motto of the Kelly Clan


 TUTUM TE ROBORE REDDAM ,,,,, I will give you safety by strength ,,,,, Motto of the Clan Crawford


 TUUM EST ,,,,, It's up to you ,,,,, Motto of the University of British Columbia


 UBERRIMA FIDES ,,,,, most abundant faith ,,,,, Or "utmost good faith" (cf. _bona fide_). A legal maxim of insurance contracts requiring all parties to deal in good faith. 

 UBERTAS ET FIDELITAS ,,,,, fertility and faithfulness ,,,,, Motto of Tasmania. 

 UBI AMOR, IBI DOLOR ,,,,, where [there is] love, there [is] pain ,,,,, 

 UBI BENE IBI PATRIA ,,,,, where [it is] well, there [is] the fatherland ,,,,, Or "Home is where it's good"; see also _ubi panis ibi patria_. 

 UBI CARITAS ET AMOR DEUS IBI EST ,,,,, where there is charity and love, God is there ,,,,, 

 UBI DUBIUM IBI LIBERTAS ,,,,, where [there is] doubt, there [is] freedom ,,,,, Anonymous proverb. 

 UBI JUS IBI REMEDIUM ,,,,, Where [there is] a right, there [is] a remedy ,,,,, 

 UBI MEL IBI APES ,,,,, where [there is] honey, there [are] bees ,,,,, Similar to "you catch more bees with honey than with vinegar"—treat people nicely and they will treat you nicely in return. 

 UBI LIBERTAS IBI PATRIA ,,,,, where [there is] liberty, there [is] the fatherland ,,,,, Or "where there is liberty, there is my country". Patriotic motto. 

 UBI NIHIL VALES, IBI NIHIL VELIS ,,,,, where you are worth nothing, there you will wish for nothing ,,,,, From the writings of the Flemish philosopher Arnold Geulincx; also quoted by Samuel Beckett in his first published novel, Murphy. 

 UBI NON ACCUSATOR IBI NON IUDEX ,,,,, where [there is] no accuser, there [is] no judge ,,,,, Thus, there can be no judgment or case if no one charges a defendant with a crime. The phrase is sometimes parodied as "where there are no police, there is no speed limit". 

 UBI PANIS IBI PATRIA ,,,,, where there is bread, there is my country ,,,,, 

 UBI PUS, IBI EVACUA ,,,,, where there is pus, there evacuate it ,,,,, 

 UBI RE VERA ,,,,, when, in a true thing ,,,,, Or "whereas, in reality..." Also rendered _ubi revera_ ("when, in fact" or "when, actually"). 

 UBI SOCIETAS IBI IUS ,,,,, if there's a society, law will be there ,,,,, By Aristotle. 

 UBI SOLITUDINEM FACIUNT PACEM APPELLANT ,,,,, They make a desert and call it peace ,,,,, from a speech by Calgacus reported/constructed by Tacitus, _Agricola_, ch. 30. 

 UBI SUNT ,,,,, where are they? ,,,,, Nostalgic theme of poems yearning for days gone by. From the line _ubi sunt qui ante nos fuerunt_ ("Where are they, those who have gone before us?"). 

 UBIQUE, QUO FAS ET GLORIA DUCUNT ,,,,, everywhere, where right and glory leads ,,,,, Motto of the Royal Artillery and most other Artillery corps within the armies of the British Commonwealth (for example, the Royal Canadian Artillery, Royal Australian Artillery and Royal New Zealand Artillery). 

 ULTIMA RATIO ,,,,, last method the final argument the last resort (as force) ,,,,, ------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ----------- --------- --------------------- ----------- The last resort. Sh ort form for the meta phor "The Last Resort of Kings and Common Men" referring to the act of declaring war ; used in the names t he French sniper rifl e PGM Ultima Ratio an d the fictional Reaso n weapon system. Loui s XIV of France had _ Ultima Ratio Regum_ ( "last argument of kin gs") cast on the cann ons of his armies; mo tto of the 1st Battal ion 11th Marines; mot to of the Artillerire gementet. [Cannon i nscribed "ultima rati o regum"] ------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ----------- --------- --------------------- ----------- 

 ULTIMO MENSE (ULT.) ,,,,, in the last month ,,,,, Used in formal correspondence to refer to the previous month. Used with inst. ("this month") and prox. ("next month"). 

 ULTRA VIRES ,,,,, beyond powers ,,,,, "Without authority". Used to describe an action done without proper authority, or acting without the rules. The term will most often be used in connection with appeals and petitions. 

 ULTRA POSSE NEMO OBLIGATUR ,,,,, No one is obligated beyond what he is able to do. ,,,,, 

 ULULAS ATHENAS ,,,,, (to send) owls to Athens ,,,,, From Gerhard Gerhards' (1466–1536) [better known as Erasmus] collection of annotated Adagia (1508). Latin translation of a classical Greek proverb. Generally means putting large effort in a necessarily fruitless enterprise. Compare "selling coal to Newcastle". 

 UNA HIRUNDO NON FACIT VER ,,,,, one swallow does not make summer ,,,,, A single example of something positive does not necessarily mean that all subsequent similar instances will have the same outcome. 

 UNA SALUS VICTIS NULLAM SPERARE SALUTEM ,,,,, the only safety for the conquered is to hope for no safety ,,,,, Less literally, "the only safe bet for the vanquished is to expect no safety". Preceded by _moriamur et in media arma ruamus_ ("let us die even as we rush into the midst of battle") in Virgil's _Aeneid_, book 2, lines 353–354. Used in Tom Clancy's novel _Without Remorse_, where character John Clark translates it as "the one hope of the doomed is not to hope for safety". It was said several times in "Andromeda" as the motto of the SOF units. 

 UNITAS, IUSTITIA, SPES ,,,,, unity, justice, hope ,,,,, Motto of Vilnius. 

 UNITAS PER SERVITIAM ,,,,, unity through service ,,,,, Motto for the St. Xavier's Institution Board of Librarians. 

 UNITI AEDIFICAMUS ,,,,, united we build ,,,,, Motto of the Mississippi Makerspace Community 

 UNO FLATU ,,,,, in one breath ,,,,, Used in criticism of inconsistent pleadings, i.e. "one cannot argue _uno flatu_ both that the company does not exist and that it is also responsible for the wrong." 

 UNO SUMUS ANIMO ,,,,, we are one of soul ,,,,, Motto of Stedelijk Gymnasium Leiden 

 UNUS MULTORUM ,,,,, one of many ,,,,, An average person. 

 UNUS PAPA ROMAE, UNUS PORTUS ANCONAE, UNA TURRIS CREMONAE, UNA CERES RACONAE ,,,,, One pope in Rome, one port in Ancona, one tower in Cremona, one beer in Rakovník ,,,,, Motto of the Czech Brewery in Rakovník.^([114]) 

 URBI ET ORBI ,,,,, to the city and the circle [of the lands] ,,,,, Meaning "To Rome and the World". A standard opening of Roman proclamations. Also a traditional blessing by the pope. 

 URBS IN HORTO ,,,,, city in a garden ,,,,, Motto of the City of Chicago. 

 USQUE AD FINEM ,,,,, to the very end ,,,,, Often used in reference to battle, implying a willingness to keep fighting until you die. 

 USUS EST MAGISTER OPTIMUS ,,,,, practice is the best teacher. ,,,,, In other words, _practice makes perfect_. Also sometimes translated "use makes master." 

 UT BIBERENT QUONIAM ESSE NOLLENT ,,,,, so that they might drink, since they refused to eat ,,,,, Also rendered with _quando_ ("when") in place of _quoniam_. From a book by Suetonius (_Vit. Tib._, 2.2) and Cicero (_De Natura Deorum_, 2.3). The phrase was said by Roman admiral Publius Claudius Pulcher right before the battle of Drepana, as he threw overboard the sacred chickens which had refused to eat the grain offered them—an unwelcome omen of bad luck. Thus, the sense is, "if they do not perform as expected, they must suffer the consequences". He lost the battle disastrously. 

 UT COGNOSCANT TE ,,,,, so that they may know You. ,,,,, Motto of Boston College High School. 

 UT DESINT VIRES, TAMEN EST LAUDANDA VOLUNTAS ,,,,, though the power be lacking, the will is to be praised all the same ,,,,, From Ovid, _Epistulae ex Ponto_ (III, 4, 79). 

 UT DICITUR ,,,,, as has been said; as above ,,,,, 

 UT INCEPIT FIDELIS SIC PERMANET ,,,,, as she began loyal, so she persists ,,,,, Poetically, "Loyal she began, loyal she remains." Motto of Ontario. 

 UT INFRA ,,,,, as below ,,,,, 

 UT IN OMNIBUS GLORIFICETUR DEUS. ,,,,, that in all things, God may be glorified ,,,,, Motto of the Order of St. Benedict. 

 UT MARE QUOD UT VENTUS ,,,,, to sea and into wind ,,,,, Motto of USNS Washington Chambers 

 UT OMNES TE COGNOSCANT ,,,,, that all may know you ,,,,, Motto of Niagara University 

 UT PROSIM ,,,,, that I may serve ,,,,, Motto of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 

 UT PROVERBIUM LOQUITUR VETUS... ,,,,, you know what they say... ,,,,, Lit: As the old proverb says... 

 UT RES MAGIS VALEAT QUAM PEREAT ,,,,, that the matter may have effect rather than fail^([115]) ,,,,, 

 UT RETRO ,,,,, as backwards ,,,,, Or "as on the back side"; thus, "as on the previous page" (cf. _ut supra_). 

 UT ROMA CADIT, SIC OMNIS TERRA ,,,,, as Rome falls, so [falls] the whole world ,,,,, 

 UT SIT FINIS LITIUM ,,,,, so there might be an end of litigation ,,,,, A traditional brocard. The full form is _Interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium_, "it is in the government's interest that there be an end to litigation." Often quoted in the context of statutes of limitation. 

 UT SUPRA ,,,,, as above ,,,,, 

 UT TENSIO SIC VIS ,,,,, as the extension, so the force ,,,,, Robert Hooke's expression of his discovery of his law of linear elasticity. Also: Motto of École Polytechnique de Montréal. Motto of the British Watch and Clockmaker's Guild. 

 UTILIS IN MINISTERIUM ,,,,, usefulness in service ,,,,, Comes from 2 Timothy 4:11. Motto of Camberwell Girls Grammar School. 

 UTRAQUE UNUM ,,,,, both into one ,,,,, Also translated as "that the two may be one." Motto found in 18th century Spanish dollar coins. Motto of Georgetown University.From the Vulgate, Eph. 2:14, _Ipse enim est pax nostra, qui fecit utraque unum_, "For he is our peace, who hath made both one." 

 UTRINQUE PARATUS ,,,,, ready for anything ,,,,, Motto of The British Parachute Regiment. Motto of the Belize National Coast Guard. 

 VACATE ET SCIRE ,,,,, Be still and know. ,,,,, Motto of the University of Sussex. 

 VADE AD FORMICAM ,,,,, go to the ant ,,,,, From the Vulgate, _Proverbs_ 6:6. The full quotation translates as "Go to the ant, you sluggard; consider its ways and be wise!"^([Pro\ 6:6]) 

 VADE MECUM ,,,,, go with me ,,,,, A _vade-mecum_ or _vademecum_ is an item one carries around, especially a handbook. 

 VADE RETRO SATANA ,,,,, go back, Satan ,,,,, An exhortation to Satan to be gone, often a Roman Catholic response to temptation. From a popular Medieval Roman Catholic exorcism formula, derived from the rebuke of Jesus Christ to St. Peter, as quoted in the Vulgate, _Mark_ 8:33: _vade retro me Satana_ ("get behind Me, Satan").^([Mark\ 8:33 ]) The phrase "_vade retro_" ("go back") is also in Terence's _Formio_, I, 4, 203. 

 VAE VICTIS ,,,,, woe to the conquered ,,,,, Attributed by Livy to Brennus, the chief of the Gauls, stated with his demand for more gold from the citizens of the sacked city of Rome in 390 BC. 

 VANITAS VANITATUM OMNIA VANITAS ,,,,, vanity of vanities; everything [is] vanity ,,,,, Or more simply: "vanity, vanity, everything vanity". From the Vulgate, _Ecclesiastes_ 1:2;12:8. 

 VATICINIUM EX EVENTU ,,,,, prophecy from the event ,,,,, A purported prediction stated as if it was made before the event it describes, while in fact being made thereafter. 

 VEL NON ,,,,, or not ,,,,, Summary of alternatives, e. g., "this action turns upon whether the claimant was the deceased's grandson _vel non_." 

 VELLE EST POSSE ,,,,, to be willing is to be able ,,,,, Non-literally, "where there is a will, there is a way". It is the motto of Hillfield, one of the founding schools of Hillfield Strathallan College. 

 VELOCIUS QUAM ASPARAGI COQUANTUR ,,,,, faster than asparagus can be cooked ,,,,, Or simply "faster than cooking asparagus". Ascribed to Augustus by Suetonius in _The Twelve Caesars_, Book 2 (Augustus), para. 87. It refers to anything done very quickly. A very common variant is _celerius quam asparagi cocuntur_ ("faster than asparagus _[is]_ cooked"). 

 VELUT ARBOR AEVO ,,,,, as a tree with the passage of time ,,,,, Motto of the University of Toronto, Canada. 

 VENI, VIDI, VICI ,,,,, I came, I saw, I conquered ,,,,, The message supposedly sent by Julius Caesar to the Roman Senate to describe his battle against King Pharnaces II of Pontus near Zela in 47 BC. 

 VENTURIS VENTIS ,,,,, to the coming winds ,,,,, Motto of Brasília, the capital of Brazil. 

 VERA CAUSA ,,,,, true cause ,,,,, 

 VERBA DOCENT EXEMPLA TRAHUNT ,,,,, words instruct, illustrations lead ,,,,, This refers to the relevance of illustrations, for example in preaching. 

 VERBA EX ORE ,,,,, words from mouth ,,,,, Taking the words out of someone’s mouth, speaking exactly what the other colloquist wanted to say. 

 VERBA ITA SUNT INTELLIGENDA UT RES MAGIS VALEAT QUAM PEREAT ,,,,, words are to be understood such that the subject matter may be more effective than wasted ,,,,, I. e., when explaining a subject, it is important to clarify rather than confuse. 

 VERBA VANA AUT RISUI NON LOQUI ,,,,, not to speak words in vain or to start laughter ,,,,, A Roman Catholic religious precept, being Rule 56 of the _Rule of Saint Benedict_. 

 VERBA VOLANT, SCRIPTA MANENT ,,,,, words fly away, writings remain ,,,,, Quotation from a famous speech of Caius Titus in the ancient Roman Senate. 

 VERBATIM ,,,,, word for word ,,,,, The phrase refers to perfect transcription or quotation. 

 VERBATIM ET LITERATIM ,,,,, word for word and letter by letter ,,,,, 

 VERBI DIVINI MINISTER ,,,,, servant of the Divine Word ,,,,, A phrase denoting a priest. Cf. "_Verbum Dei_" _infra_. 

 VERBI GRATIA (V. GR. OR V. G.) ,,,,, for example ,,,,, Literally, "for the sake of a word". 

 VERBUM DEI ,,,,, Word of God ,,,,, See religious text. 

 VERBUM DOMINI LUCERNA PEDIBUS NOSTRIS ,,,,, The word of the Lord [is] a light for our feet ,,,,, Motto of the University of Groningen. 

 VERBUM DOMINI MANET IN AETERNUM (VDMA) ,,,,, the word of the Lord endures forever ,,,,, Motto of the Lutheran Reformation. 

 VERB. SAP. VERBUM SAP. ,,,,, a word to the wise [is sufficient] ,,,,, A phrase denoting that the listener can fill in the omitted remainder, or enough is said. It is the truncation of "_verbum sapienti sat[is] est_". 

 VERBUM VOLITANS ,,,,, flying word ,,,,, A word that floats in the air, on which everyone is thinking and is just about to be imposed.^([_citation\ needed_]) 

 VERITAS ,,,,, truth ,,,,, A motto of the Roman Catholic Order of Preachers, and the motto of many educational institutions, including Harvard University (albeit truncated), Cabra Dominican College, and Bishop Lynch High School. 

 VERITAS AEQUITAS ,,,,, truth [and] justice ,,,,, 

 VERITAS, BONITAS, PULCHRITUDO, SANCTITAS ,,,,, truth, goodness, beauty, [and] sanctity ,,,,, Motto of Fu Jen Catholic University, Taiwan. 

 VERITAS CHRISTO ET ECCLESIAE ,,,,, truth for Christ and church ,,,,, The _de iure_ motto of Harvard University, United States, which dates to its foundation; it is often shortened to _veritas_ to remove its original religious meaning. 

 VERITAS CUM LIBERTATE ,,,,, truth with liberty ,,,,, Motto of Winthrop University. 

 VERITAS CURAT ,,,,, truth cures ,,,,, Motto of Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research. 

 VERITAS DEI VINCIT ,,,,, the truth of God conquers ,,,,, Motto of the Hussites. 

 VERITAS DOMINI MANET IN AETERNUM ,,,,, the truth of the Lord remains for eternity ,,,,, 

 VERITAS ET FORTITUDO ,,,,, truth and fortitude ,,,,, One of the mottos of the Lyceum of the Philippines University. 

 VERITAS ET VIRTUS ,,,,, truth and virtue ,,,,, Motto of the University of Pittsburgh, Methodist University, and Mississippi College. 

 VERITAS, FIDES, SAPIENTIA ,,,,, truth, faith, [and] wisdom ,,,,, Motto of Dowling Catholic High School. 

 VERITAS IN CARITATE ,,,,, truth in charity ,,,,, Motto of Bishop Wordsworth's School and St Munchin's College. 

 VERITAS, IUSTITIA, LIBERTAS ,,,,, truth, justice, [and] liberty ,,,,, Motto of the Free University of Berlin. 

 VERITAS LIBERABIT VOS ,,,,, truth shall liberate you ,,,,, Motto of Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan. 

 VERITAS LUX MEA ,,,,, truth [is] my light ,,,,, A common, non-literal translation is "truth enlightens me". The motto of Seoul National University, South Korea. 

 VERITAS NUMQUAM PERIT ,,,,, truth never expires ,,,,, Authored by Seneca the Younger. 

 VERITAS ODIT MORAS ,,,,, truth hates delay ,,,,, Authored by Seneca the Younger. 

 VERITAS OMNIA VINCIT ,,,,, truth conquers all ,,,,, A quotation from a letter of Jan Hus. The motto of Carncot Independent School for Girls and Boys; Wilfrid Laurier University, Ontario, Canada; Satyameva Jayate; and the Triangle Fraternity. 

 VERITAS, UNITAS, CARITAS ,,,,, truth, unity, [and] love ,,,,, Motto of Villanova University, United States. 

 VERITAS VINCIT ,,,,, truth conquers ,,,,, Cf. "_veritas omnia vincit_" _supra_. It is the motto on the standard of the Presidents of Czechoslovakia and the Czech Republic, and of the Scottish Clan Keith. 

 VERITAS. VIRTUS. LIBERTAS. ,,,,, Truth. Virtue. Liberty. ,,,,, Motto of the University of Szeged, Hungary. 

 VERITAS VITÆ MAGISTRA ,,,,, truth is the teacher of life ,,,,, Another plausible translation is "truth is the mistress of life". It is the unofficial motto of the University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras and is inscribed in its tower. 

 VERITAS VOS LIBERABIT ,,,,, truth will liberate you [all] ,,,,, Motto of Johns Hopkins University, United States. 

 VERITATE DUCE PROGREDI ,,,,, advancing with truth leading ,,,,, Motto of the University of Arkansas, Arkansas, United States. 

 [IN] VERITATE ET CARITATE ,,,,, in truth and charity ,,,,, Motto of Catholic Junior College, Singapore; St. Xavier's School, and Hazaribagh, India. 

 VERITATE ET VIRTUTE ,,,,, with truth and virtue ,,,,, The motto of Sydney Boys High School. It is alternatively rendered "_virtute et veritate_" ("with virtue and truth"), which is the motto of Walford Anglican School for Girls and Pocklington School. 

 VERITATEM DILEXI ,,,,, I esteemed truth ,,,,, Alternatively, "I loved truth". It is the motto of Bryn Mawr College. 

 VERITATEM FRATRIBUS TESTARI ,,,,, to bear witness to truth in fraternity ,,,,, Motto of Xaverian Brothers High School. 

 VERITATEM COGNOSCERE ,,,,, to know truth ,,,,, Motto of the Clandestine Service of the United States Central Intelligence Agency. 

 VERO NIHIL VERIUS ,,,,, nothing [is] truer than truth ,,,,, Motto of Mentone Girls' Grammar School. 

 VERO POSSUMUS ,,,,, yes, we can ,,,,, A variation of the campaign slogan of then-Senator Barack Obama, which was superimposed on a variation of the Great Seal of the United States during the US presidential campaign of 2008.^([116]) 

 VERSUS (VS) _or_ (V.) ,,,,, towards ,,,,, Literally, "in the direction [of]". It is erroneously used in English for "against", probably as the truncation of "_adversus_", especially in reference to two opponents, e. g., the parties to litigation or a sports match. 

 VESTIGIA NULLA RETRORSUM ,,,,, Never a backward step ,,,,, Motto of Wanganui Collegiate School. 

 VETO ,,,,, I forbid ,,,,, The word denotes the right to unilaterally forbid or void a specific proposal, especially legislation. It is derived from ancient Roman voting procedures. 

 VEXATA QUAESTIO ,,,,, vexed question ,,,,, Latin legal phrase denoting a question that is often debated or considered, but is not generally settled, such that contrary answers may be held by different persons. 

 VEXILLA REGIS PRODEUNT INFERNI ,,,,, forth go the banners of the king of Hell ,,,,, Authored by Dante Alighieri in Canto XXXIV of the _Inferno_, the phrase is an allusion to and play upon the Latin Easter hymn _Vexilla Regis_. The phrase is repeatedly referenced in the works of Walter M. Miller, Jr.. 

 VI COACTUS ,,,,, under constraint ,,,,, A legal phrase regarding contracts that indicates agreement made under duress. 

 VI ET ANIMO ,,,,, with heart and soul ,,,,, Alternatively, "strength and courage". It is the motto of the Ascham School and on the coat of arms of the McCulloch Clan. 

 VI VERI UNIVERSUM VIVUS VICI ,,,,, by the power of truth, I, while living, have conquered the universe ,,,,, Magickal motto of Aleister Crowley. 

 VIA ,,,,, by the road/way ,,,,, The word denotes "by way of" or "by means of", e. g., "I will contact you via email". 

 VIA MEDIA ,,,,, middle road/way ,,,,, This phrase describes a compromise between two extremes or the radical center political position. 

 VIA, VERITAS, VITA ,,,,, the Way, the Truth, [and] the Life ,,,,, The words of Jesus Christ in _John_ 14:6. It is the motto of many institutions, including Glasgow University, Scotland, United Kingdom. 

 VIAM SAPIENTIAE MONSTRABO TIBI ,,,,, I will show you the way of wisdom ,,,,, The motto of DePaul University. 

 VICE ,,,,, in place of ,,,,, The word refers to one who acts in the place of another. It is used as a separate word or as a hyphenated prefix, e. g., "Vice President" and "Vice-Chancellor". 

 VICE VERSA VERSA VICE ,,,,, with position turned ,,,,, For other uses, see Vice Versa (disambiguation). Thus, "the other way around", "conversely", _et cetera_. Historically and in British English, "_vice_" is pronounced as two syllables, but in American English the singular syllable pronunciation is almost universal. Classical Latin pronunciation dictates that the letter "c" is only a hard sound, like "k", thus _vee-KEH vehr-sah_. Moreover, it also dictates that the letter "v", when consonantal, represents /w/; i. e. in classical times, the "v" was pronounced like the modern "w"; hence _WEE-keh WEHR-sah_.^([117]) 

 VICTORIA AUT MORS ,,,,, victory or death ,,,,, Similar to "_aut vincere aut mori_". 

 VICTORIA CONCORDIA CRESCIT ,,,,, victory comes from harmony ,,,,, The official motto of the Arsenal F.C.. 

 VICTRIX CAUSA DIIS PLACUIT SED VICTA CATONI ,,,,, the victorious cause pleased the gods, but the conquered cause pleased Cato ,,,,, Authored by Lucan in _Pharsalia_, 1, 128. The dedicatory inscription on the south face of the Confederate Memorial in Arlington National Cemetery, Virginia, United States. 

 VIDE ,,,,, "see" or "refer to" ,,,,, The word is used in scholarly citations. 

 VIDE INFRA (v. i.) ,,,,, see below ,,,,, The word is used in scholarly works. 

 VIDE SUPRA (v. s.) ,,,,, see above ,,,,, The word is used in scholarly works to refer to previous text in the same document. It is sometimes truncated to "_supra_". 

 VIDELICET (viz.) ,,,,, "namely", "that is to say", or "as follows" ,,,,, A contraction of "_videre licet_" ("it is permitted to see"), _vide infra_. 

 VIDEO ET TACEO ,,,,, I see and keep silent ,,,,, The motto of Queen Elizabeth I of England. 

 VIDEO MELIORA PROBOQUE DETERIORA SEQUOR ,,,,, I see and approve of the better, but I follow the worse ,,,,, From the _Metamorphoses_ Book 7, 20-1 of Ovid, being a summary of the experience of akrasia. 

 VIDEO SED NON CREDO ,,,,, I see it, but I do not believe it ,,,,, The statement of Caspar Hofmann (de) after being shown proof of the circulatory system by William Harvey. 

 VIDERE LICET ,,,,, "it is permitted to see" or "one may see" ,,,,, The phrase is used in scholarship. 

 VIM PROMOVET INSITAM ,,,,, promotes one's innate power ,,,,, Motto of the University of Bristol, derived from Horace, _Ode_ 4, 4. 

 VINCE MALUM BONO ,,,,, overcome evil with good ,,,,, A partial quotation of _Romans_ 12:21. A motto of Old Swinford Hospital and Bishop Cotton School in Shimla. 

 VINCERE EST VIVERE ,,,,, to conquer is to live ,,,,, Motto of Captain John Smith. 

 VINCERE SCIS HANNIBAL VICTORIA UTI NESCIS ,,,,, you know [how] to win, Hannibal; you do not know [how] to use victory ,,,,, According to Livy, a colonel in the cavalry stated this to Hannibal after victory in the Battle of Cannae in 216 BC, meaning that Hannibal should have marched on Rome immediately. 

 VINCIT OMNIA VERITAS ,,,,, truth conquers all ,,,,, University of Mindanao 

 VINCIT QUI PATITUR ,,,,, he conquers who endures ,,,,, First attributed to the Roman scholar and satirst Persius. It is frequently used as a motto. 

 VINCIT QUI SE VINCIT ,,,,, he (she) conquers who conquers himself (herself) ,,,,, Motto of many educational institutions, including the Philadelphia High School for Girls and North Sydney Boys High School. It is alternatively rendered as "_bis vincit qui se vincit_" ("he (she) who prevails over himself (herself) is twice victorious"). It is also the motto of the Beast in Disney's film _Beauty and the Beast_, as seen inscribed in the castle's stained glass window near the beginning of the film. 

 VINCULUM JURIS ,,,,, the chain of the law ,,,,, The phrase denotes that a thing is legally binding. "A civil obligation is one which has a binding operation in law, _vinculum juris_." (_Bouvier's Law Dictionary_ (1856), "Obligation") 

 VINUM ET MUSICA LAETIFICANT COR ,,,,, wine and music gladden the heart ,,,,, Asterix and Caesar's Gift; it is a variation of "_vinum bonum laetificat cor hominis_". 

 VINUM REGUM, REX VINORUM ,,,,, the wine of kings, the king of wines ,,,,, The phrase describes Hungarian Tokaji wine, and is attributed to King Louis XIV of France. 

 VIPERAM SUB ALA NUTRICARE ,,,,, a viper nursed at the bosom ,,,,, A _caveat_ regarding trusting someone against his inherent nature; the moral of Aesop's fable _The Farmer and the Viper_. 

 VIR PRUDENS NON CONTRA VENTUM MINGIT ,,,,, [a] wise man does not urinate [up] against the wind ,,,,, 

 VIR QUISQUE VIR ,,,,, every man a man ,,,,, Motto of the US collegiate fraternity Lambda Chi Alpha. 

 VIRES ACQUIRIT EUNDO ,,,,, she gathers strength as she goes ,,,,, A quotation from Vergil's _Aeneid_, Book 4, 175, which in the original context refers to Pheme. The motto on the Coat of arms of Melbourne. 

 VIRIBUS UNITIS ,,,,, with united forces ,,,,, Motto of the house of Habsburg-Lorraine. 

 VIRILE AGITUR ,,,,, the manly thing is being done ,,,,, The motto of Knox Grammar School. 

 VIRILITER AGE ,,,,, "act manfully" or "act courageously" ,,,,, The motto of Marist College Ashgrove and other institutions. 

 VIRILITER AGITE ,,,,, act in a manly way ,,,,, The motto of St Muredach's College and the PAREF Southridge School for Boys. 

 VIRILITER AGITE ESTOTE FORTES ,,,,, act manfully, be strong ,,,,, The motto of Culford School. 

 VIRTUS ET LABOR ,,,,, virtue and [hard] work ,,,,, Motto of Don Bosco Liluah, India and St. Georges College, Mussoorie, India. 

 VIRTUS ET SCIENTIA ,,,,, virtue and knowledge ,,,,, A common motto, preeminently that of La Salle University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States. 

 VIRTUS IN MEDIA STAT ,,,,, virtue stands in the middle ,,,,, A principle derived from the ethical theory of Aristotle. Idiomatically, "good practice lies in the middle path" between two extremes. It is disputed whether "_medi_a" or "_medi_o" is correct. 

 VIRTUS JUNXIT MORS NON SEPARABIT ,,,,, that which virtue unites, let not death separate ,,,,, Motto of the Masonic (Scottish Rite). 

 VIRTUS LAUDATA CRESCIT ,,,,, greatness increases with praise ,,,,, Motto of the Berkhamsted School. 

 VIRTUS NON STEMMA ,,,,, valor, not garland ,,,,, Motto of the Duke of Westminster, inscribed at his residence in Eaton, and the motto of Grosvenor Rowing Club and Harrow County School for Boys. 

 VIRTUS SOLA NOBILITAS ,,,,, virtue alone [is] noble ,,,,, Motto of Christian Brothers College, St Kilda. 

 VIRTUS TENTAMINE GAUDET ,,,,, strength rejoices in the challenge ,,,,, Motto of Hillsdale College, Michigan, United States. 

 VIRTUS UNITA FORTIOR ,,,,, virtue united [is] stronger ,,,,, State motto of Andorra. 

 VIRTUTE DUCE ,,,,, led by virtue ,,,,, Motto of the Acciari family (it). 

 VIRTUTE DUCE COMITE FORTUNA ,,,,, led by virtue, accompanied by [good] fortune ,,,,, Motto of the Institut d'études politiques de Lyon and the Accorretti family (it). 

 VIRTUTE ET ARMIS ,,,,, by virtue and arms ,,,,, Alternatively, "by manliness and weapons". The State motto of Mississippi, United States. The phrase was possibly derived from the motto of Lord Gray de Wilton, "_virtute non armis fido_" ("I trust in virtue, not in arms"). Alternatively it is rendered as "_virtute et labore_" ("by manliness and work"), which is the motto of Pretoria Boys High School. 

 VIRTUTE ET INDUSTRIA ,,,,, by virtue and industry ,,,,, Motto of Bristol, United Kingdom. 

 VIRTUTE ET VERITATE ,,,,, by virtue and truth ,,,,, Motto of Pocklington School. 

 VIS LEGIS ,,,,, the power of the law ,,,,, 

 VIS MAJOR ,,,,, _force majeure_, superior force ,,,,, 

 VISIO DEI ,,,,, vision of a god ,,,,, 

 VITA ANTE ACTA ,,,,, a life done before ,,,,, The phrase denotes a previous life, generally believed to be the result of reincarnation. 

 VITA, DULCEDO, SPES ,,,,, Mary, our] life, sweetness, [and] hope ,,,,, The motto of the University of Notre Dame, Indiana, United States, which is derived from the Roman Catholic hymn to the Blessed Virgin Mary titled _Salve Regina_. 

 VITA INCERTA, MORS CERTISSIMA ,,,,, life is uncertain, death is most certain ,,,,, More simply, "the most certain thing in life is death". 

 VITA MUTATUR, NON TOLLITUR ,,,,, life is changed, not taken away ,,,,, The phrase is a quotation from the preface of the first Roman Catholic rite of the Mass for the Dead. 

 VITA PATRIS ,,,,, during the life of the father ,,,,, Hence the term "_decessit vita patris_" (d. v. p) or "died v. p.", which is seen in genealogical works such as _Burke's Peerage_. 

 VITA SUMMA BREVIS SPEM NOS VETAT INCOHARE LONGAM ,,,,, the shortness of life prevents us from entertaining far-off hopes ,,,,, This is a wistful refrain that is sometimes used ironically. It is derived from the first line of Horace's _Ode 1_. It was later used as the title of a short poem of Ernest Dowson. 

 VITAI LAMPADA TRADUNT ,,,,, they hand on the torch of life ,,,,, A quotation from the poem of Lucretius, _De rerum natura_, Book 2, 77-9. The ordinary spelling "_vitae_" in two syllables had to be changed to "_vitaï_" in three syllables to satisfy the requirements of the poem's dactylic hexameters. It is the motto of the Sydney Church of England Grammar School and others. 

 VITAM AMPLIFICARE HOMINIBUS HOMINESQUE SOCIETATI ,,,,, mankind [who] extends the life of the community ,,,,, Motto of East Los Angeles College, California, United States. 

 VIVA VOCE ,,,,, living voice ,,,,, The phrase denotes an oral, as opposed to written, examination of a candidate. 

 VIVAT CRESCAT FLOREAT ,,,,, may it live, grow, [and] flourish ,,,,, 

 VIVAT REX ,,,,, may the king live ,,,,, The acclamation is ordinary translated as "long live the king!". In the case of a female queen, "_vivat regina_" ("long live the queen"). 

 VIVAT REX, CURAT LEX ,,,,, long live the king, guardian of the law ,,,,, A curious translation of the pun on "_vivat rex_", found in Westerham parish church in Kent, England. 

 VIVE MEMOR LETI ,,,,, live remembering death ,,,,, Authored by Persius. Cf. "_memento mori_". 

 VIVE UT VIVAS ,,,,, live so that you may live ,,,,, The phrase suggests that one should live life to the fullest and without fear of the possible consequences. 

 VIVERE EST COGITARE ,,,,, to live is to think ,,,,, Authored by Cicero. Cf. "_cogito ergo sum_". 

 VIVERE MILITARE EST ,,,,, to live is to fight ,,,,, Authored by Seneca the Younger in Epistle 96, 5. Cf. the allegory of Miles Christianus based on "_militia est vita hominis_" from the Vulgate, Book of Job 7:1. 

 VOCATUS ATQUE NON VOCATUS DEUS ADERIT ,,,,, called and not called, God will be present ,,,,, Alternatively, "called and even not called, God approaches". Attributed to the Oracle at Delphi. The motto of Carl Jung, and inscribed in his home and grave. 

 VOLENTI NON FIT INJURIA ,,,,, to one willing, no harm is done ,,,,, Alternatively, "to him who consents, no harm is done". The principle is used in the law of torts and denotes that one can not be held liable for injuries inflicted on another who consented to the act that injured him. 

 VOS ESTIS SAL TERRAE ,,,,, you are the salt of the earth ,,,,, A famous biblical sentence proclaimed by Jesus Christ. 

 VOTUM SEPARATUM ,,,,, separate vow ,,,,, The phrase denotes an independent, minority voice. 

 VOX CLAMANTIS IN DESERTO ,,,,, the voice of one clamoring in the desert ,,,,, Or traditionally, "the voice of one crying in the wilderness". A quotation of the Vulgate, _Isaiah_ 40:3, and quoted by St. John the Baptist in _Mark_ 1:3 and _John_ 1:23). It is the motto of Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, United States. 

 VOX NIHILI ,,,,, voice of nothing ,,,,, The phrase denotes a useless or ambiguous statement. 

 VOX POPULI ,,,,, voice of the people ,,,,, The phrase denotes a brief interview of a common person that is not previously arranged, e. g., an interview on a street. It is sometimes truncated to "_vox pop._" 

 VOX POPULI, VOX DEI ,,,,, the voice of the people [is] the voice of God ,,,,, 
